---
hello welcome to live with Dr jod and we're going to be talking about dual brain Psychology today I have a special guest here Dr Schiffer uh his name is Fred and he is a psychiatrist he's an assistant professor at Harvard Medical School he's a researcher inventor and an author of a a book coming out this fall it's called goodbye anxiety depression addiction and PTSD the life changing science of dual brain psychology I've been reading about this dual brain psychology since I booked Dr shiffer on the show um and today he'll share with us how the brain works what happens when we experience trauma and all about this dual brain psychology so and how it could help with depression with anxiety with PTSD and with addiction so let's get started welcome Fred it's so nice to meet you today hi nice to meet you uh so uh why don't I start off with a a brief explanation of what dual brain psychology is so i' love that dual brain psychology is the first psychological theory to come out of uh rigorous experimentation uh specifically the Dual brain studies of the 1960s uh and um uh and to be tested rigorously uh at harm Harvard uh at mlan hospital uh with um uh high-tech um uh modalities and and and also clinical trials and so it's it's it's a theory that has uh to my knowledge it's the only theory that has been sort of scientifically tested and and uh and the the premise uh of dual brain psychology is that trauma very broadly defined uh as whatever hurts us uh especially in early childhood uh gets associated with one brain hemisphere or the other either the left brain or the right brain and U uh that we commonly think that the right brain is negative and in many ways it is uh but in in what I'm doing uh it seems that we have two minds we have a mind that comes out of the left brain and out of the right brain and and the uh uh one of these Minds is more affected by past traumas and so it's more troubled and has more symptoms and and more behaviors that are that are troubled can I answer a question how do you explain or how do you understand doing after doing all this work which side it is because you said when we have when we experience trauma or something that hurts us it could either be lodged I don't know what you said lodged or or in one side or the other how does it pick which one to do or how did how do you understand how that happen well the the answer is that I don't understand it okay me neither and uh uh it might have something to do with uh the type of trauma and the timing of trauma in development um it seems to me that the healthier side seems to develop uh more in in late adolescence early adulthood and that younger children don't seem to have it as much um when you see the healthier side it could be a different side for each person it is yeah but but for but for a given person uh it's the same side uh okay so it's the one that the trauma hasn't lodged in or some TR that's true like what if you have more than one experience is it always just put in the same side yeah yeah it's um uh what I can show you is uh how we um so this is my equipment as so I'll ask a patient to get their equipment and uh and if you block uh the that here I'm blocking my right eye and now the middle of my left eye and it's important that I'm not looking out the whole left eye but half the left eye so I'm looking out my left lateral visual field and uh and with fmri studies which show uh the blood flow in that in the brain hemisphere uh we we have found that when we do this it actually activates the opposite brain it has to do with the way the eyes are connected into the brain and and uh and if I go like this uh I activate my left brain and and so the first time that I tried this and and I won't go into uh how I came to do this but I was using my hands as going like this and I didn't respond uh uh and I asked a patient who was a Vietnam veteran uh to try it and he had had um uh four tours of Duty and a Purple Heart had severe PTSD which was doing he was doing quite well uh but he looked at his uh right lateral visual field which would stimulate his left brain and he got very upset and he said that plant behind you looks like the jungle and so I saw that he's having a flashback so uh I I I immediately said well uh look out the other side side and and he did and he and he smiled and he said oh that's a nice looking plan and and um and I see this every day and and uh about 55% of my patients have these really intense responses and and so like I could try it right now yeah I don't have I mean I I've done so much work on myself and I don't feel like I have too much so Nothing's Gonna maybe nothing's gonna come up but really want to try this so if I look out halfway through yeah that's perfect good and then look into the world yeah that uh sort of intensified a little bit so let me ask you to think of something upsetting uh uh maybe a childhood trauma or or whatever uh and um and it and it the response is very quick so I could ask you to measure your distress from zero to 10 I didn't I didn't have much I I guess so it was low so let me try the other side would say like two maybe okay because I was trying to think of something terrible okay okay so same same thing maybe a little bit higher but maybe I maybe I maybe it's a maybe my trauma is healed um yeah I triy to think of the most awful thing I could think of okay well that's good and and it's good that you didn't respond and and I've never seen a neurologist respond whatever that means uh so uh so it could be that your two hemispheres are are getting along well and and and uh uh uh and uh but uh it' be be interesting to try it in your practice and and and see if uh if you find a difference and then what I can do is I can talk to two people so in someone who's having a response like this Vietnam vet uh uh I'll look uh critical on on one side and and and I don't look just kind of randomly critical but I look critical like his mother was and and he doesn't like himself and if he has drug Cravings uh they increase and out the other side I I look like uh empathic therapist so you appear to him you mean yeah I thought at first when you're saying at one side I look critical like I thought you were looking critically at that side but you mean you uh he to you to him you appear like his critical like a his mother like the energy of his mother and on the other side you're an empathic therapist or psychiatrist right so it's not just a like um a pain or or craving uh it's it's really a whole view that's why I call it of two minds that yeah that a brain the whole like the whole like um like rose-colored glasses or trauma colored glasses yeah it's a different person and they both have the same address and the same social security number even the same birthday uh but uh I can they they're very different when I talk to them and uh uh and sometimes one of the problems that I encounter is that the troubled side doesn't want to give up power and he's been in power in running things for 30 years and using drugs or alcohol or whatnot and and uh and he and he sort of is saying you want me to uh retire and go in disability to hell with you you know and and uh so a lot of the therapy is kind of in negotiating and working with the trouble side to to try to show it that um uh cooperating with the other side could be helpful the other side could help you and and the healthy side becomes a co-therapist in in dual brain Psychotherapy I see yeah okay so you're so it's a uh so you're trying to converse with the the happier side or the preferred side or the feeling good side and how do you use that side to try to heal the other side a couple of things one is that it it's very clarifying uh when they if for instance if if uh I uh the feelings he has about me lead to the trauma then that becomes very clear and that uh uh that that's why he s and so so so the technique is very clarifying in terms of uh what's going on psychologically and and um and I I I work with both sides so I try and encourage the adult side to be more present and um um uh I I have a phys patient who's a physician and I and I say calling doctor so and so you know and I try and Rouse her up uh and and and uh and she'll do well if if there's a a crisis or a need and and and her strong side comes out but she also has a very depressed uh uh troubled side and um uh and and I try and get her healthy side to be like a good parent and to talk with her and and and help her and would to be a co-therapist so the the the real aim of the therapy is is is the treatment of the troubled side I see yeah and the trauma that that it had and but you find that you know using uh aligning and with that good side or that I don't want I'm trying not to use like good bad but um because it is a a healthy and a neurotic side yeah right right so it's like a preferred side and a a troubled side know that but because I want words that are changeable you know yeah um because that the troubl side could get untroubled yeah and and that's the aim of the therapy is to make it untroubled it's going to remain a child but uh I think of as like a corporation so it needs to get out of the corner office and and go into marketing or research you know and uh yeah do something that it's more capable of and cooperate with with the other side so you wrote this book goodbye anxiety depression addiction and PTSD and I thought this is really interesting because it's very based in this you know the therapy the work in the therapy session of how to use it and it it doesn't sound like it's a prescription you know you do this a protocol right it's is a listed out stuff so that's really hard to write a book when it's when it's something that you've been um um you know in the Moment casee by case trying to understand something and and and work something out how did you put that in a book and it's a self-help book right it's not for therapists well it's no it's for therapists um uh it's hard to connect with therapists so that that therapists often uh you know have their own way of doing things and and uh and so it's I find I find that it's it's it's hard sometimes to bring in a new idea especially one that is coming from Left Field you know and um but it's for therapists uh and and it's for ordinary people and it's for uh intelligent readers who want to know more about how the mind works so so in the book there are uh narrative fictional depictions that are accurate depictions of a therapy session and and so they're about five of those in the book and uh and they give a good feeling for how I work with the patient and have you done trainings like do you train other therapists and is there a bunch of people doing it what if somebody is wants to what if they watch this interview and they're like I need this this just where would they go uh well uh it's hard to uh get an audience uh for for it and and so maybe after my book comes out uh uh there'll be more of a demand uh for training so I'd like to train people because I think it's a it's it's it's very empowering I think my patients get better more quickly than they used to and and and uh and I think the the Improvement is more solid and last it lasts a long time yeah yeah how how how long have you been using it in your practice how long have you been using dual brain psychology when did you call it that like you're the person who named it right right uh so uh that day in my office was really the birth of dual brain psychology with with the Vietnam vet yeah and that was in 1995 okay and you have a Private Practice still up in Massachusetts right and and I I know you do a lot of different things but that is one of your right we're running NIH study to treat fentanyl addiction okay and uh and we're using a special LED that we developed at Mass General uh and we put it over the positive hemisphere to simulate it and we're a light I was reading about that as well people don't know LED is he's talking about the light bulb LED right uh but it's a LED it's a it's a super super luminous LED that we had manufactured and and uh uh and so you point it towards someone's forehead you put it either over here or over here depending on which is the the the uh the more mature side okay because you're it's com you're using the Dual brain psychology and knowing which side is the mature side or the healthier side and then you put the light on which side say that again the positive side the the light so the the visual technique crosses over the light goes through the skull and into the brain and has no side effects that we've encountered it could you know in in the future uh but we haven't seen any uh side effects and and the FDA has uh determined that it has no significant risk uh but what it does do that the light does stimulate the healthy your mind and the person feels better and and um and if I give a one study that I'm just submitting uh yes please I was gonna ask good I'm sorry yeah I said yes please I was gonna ask like could you give us some stats like what have you noticed um well in in the study that I just submitted uh I did a Beck depression uh scale which is a good measure of depression it's easy to administer uh before and after immediately after a treatment and um and and there were marked improvements uh one one person had a depression score of 34 which is very high and after a treatment went down to four now he's an outlier uh uh and but most people uh uh you know they they'll ask for a light treatment can I you know can I get a light sh back and um uh and and treat when we don't have to do any work right it just is like can we have some of those easy things that we just said and we get better without having to do any hard work like that well I've not that I'm saying that like happily yeah uh uh that in the uh we're treating fentanyl addiction now fentanyl is is you know very hard to treat it's hard to get the people and and and the group uh uh many of the PE half people are getting a sham device which is a placebo but half the group are doing extremely well and have stop their fentol or decreased it 70 80% uh and uh uh and a couple of people who finish a study it's a six-month study so they want to dye their hair and come back as a uh another candidate uh yeah I was wondering like sometimes the ethics of research when people are getting so much much better yeah and the people who are the control group are not or at risk that that does bring into it's an ethical U problem and and it's painful but but uh it's it's the way the FDA works yeah I know you were just want to give it to everybody if it's helping you do yeah and and hopefully one day I'll be able to yeah um yeah wonderful because I think the the you know overdose problem is growing everywhere and there is not enough uh response to that I think there's there's a lot of a lot of agencies you know I've been talking to some people locally about um you know how hard it is to do that work like how to get support for that to you know to harm reduction or um you know how to help people who are hard to you know they don't come in right they're not going to come in to the hospital Center and you know we need more mobile clinics and to to reach them and so I really appreciate this and I'm G to share it with my colleagues and also integrate it with the Psychotherapy and also I have um uh uh what I call Dr schiffer's uh stress reduction sunglasses and they they are like the envelope only you can see through do it and uh uh and and they're effective and and my I I think all my patients use them okay so you're saying you have like sunglasses that take like three fours of your vision out yeah leaving just partial the the healthy side so my right would be my left if my left was my healthy side um and so they spend some parts of their day with these on to be more and more connected to that healthy side yeah that's right interesting yeah and also I I have used the negative side so we can talk to the troubled side okay and so you can have it there in a a sort of a stable way and and and longer conversation like in controlled situations where you're practice now let's do this healing now yeah okay that's it's very exciting it's very exciting stuff yeah and the and the real treatment for the trauma is it's the same old thing it's that you have to uh grieve it and bear it and and process it and uh and not be so terrified of it and and uh uh and um uh sorry um uh and uh so that's the real treatment is is to treat the trauma you know and and we do that we get the best results that's great okay so yes so then is a is a you know you you go to talk therapy but the talk therapy itself is so much more effective because you're really uh you know you're getting at you're you're being able to use that healthy part of the brain or this Tech this uh I keep wanting to call it dual brain technology instead of dual brain psychology but it's a a similar uh concept but very exciting and then the light using the light um that is really really exciting Stefan I was picturing you said they come in for the group or I think you were talking about the control group and then the the group that was getting um the research group uh I was thinking that if you brought people in for a group and they did the light first and then were able to talk to each other or do a group therapy session how much more impactful would that therapy section that's where my mind went when you were talking about it how much more impactful would they if they were like in the waiting room and they did the light and then they came in um would their their openness or responsiveness to the conversation be different um after having that light it can be again there's a lot of variation and it's it's a therapy session so it's sort of like a soccer game you know you you from wherever the ball is sort of um but um in that patient who uh went from 34 to 4 uh sometimes he'll come in and he's just depressed and he has nothing to talk about and and everything the world is is bad and I'll say you know you look like a man who needs a light treatment and uh and so I'll give it to him and uh and then uh his demeanor changes and and and we can work on his problems that which we couldn't before he he had suffered horrible trauma and uh and and and that's sort of the problem that when the trauma is really severe uh that uh uh the that immature part tends to hold on uh and and use a repetition compulsion and thinks like a child yeah of of of course yeah the these effect is so so huge um you don't have a copy of your book to hold up I I saw you photo yeah thank you it just we'll put it down below a link to it but of course if you want to hold up the book oh the other side yeah the other side there we go oh that's great goodbye I love that you know you know my my book's called anxiety I'm so done with you so they're really similar um you know like goodbye anxiety um good riddens you know I I like that book title like goodbye anxiety because it's personified those problems as well which kind of you know kind of disconnects it with our identity so we have a and I also feel that all these diagnoses are destructive you know to call somebody borderline or bipolar or uh or addict you know that they're all demeaning and they become a new trauma and absolutely they you know they take on those identity conclusions yep and it's all and it's all due to uh early trauma that kind of snowballs and and and that really is is not demeaning yeah yeah I think so too I I like to say you know it's a reaction to trauma because I I really my biggest message is reminding to to let people know that what they feel is a regular human response to our world or experience it's not a mental illness and it's not an inherent problem or you know the way your brain's wired it is a response it's a regular human response to uh to the world and your experiences and whatever and I think that's really helpful for people and I think the problem is that if uh if you know what you're afraid of if if some you know if your neighbor is threatening you um uh that we call fear but somebody comes in with a panic attack or you know they come in they say I've got an anxiety disorder uh they don't understand what they're afraid of and and what we do is we trace it back through their feelings to to arrive at the trauma and and where the anxiety is what the anxiety is really about is is the old trauma that the little boy or the little girl inside uh can't uh trust that that he's not going to be back in Vietnam or or he's not that he's not still in Vietnam yeah yeah that's beautiful work that you do I'm so glad to have this interview we could go on and on and maybe I'd have you on again I was kind of think we we didn't know each other before we did this so this is nice this might be the start of a a connect a professional connection for us and I'd love to have you on again and I'm thinking it' be great to have somebody with us that you could you know be practicing so we could see it live with permissions obviously but um so it's it's very exciting to hear about this I love new things that could help me help people because that's what I do all the time you know um to really help people know that they are more than they think they are you know in in this moment and we could help them realize that or or bring that out or self-actualize and so um there's so much hope for healing even if you've had horrible trauma and so I think this interview proves it and there's good people out there uh if people want to get in touch with Dr Schiffer his website is dual psychology wait dual brain psychology.com I'm going to put it below dual brain psychology.com you can find him on LinkedIn at his name uh I'll put that down below too and you're not in any other socials uh do um I am but I don't know exactly how to find Once the book goes out you probably have to figure that all out but um yeah so well thank you so much any last words for um for our audience um uh well it's a pleasure meeting you and for the audience I think uh uh that you need to consider that there might be a reason why you're upset uh right rather than uh you know you've got some undiscovered genetic problem and and and and that if you can follow your feelings and get in touch with that and get some help to to help uncover it and work on it beautiful thank you so much thank you and thank you all for watching live with Dr jod uh if you're watching the recording or if you're listening to the podcast just know that I go live every Monday at 800m Eastern on my YouTube channel that's Dr jod do c o RJ o d and you could get reminders for the show especially knowing the topic or the guest that's coming on go to jodi.com guu and for uh signing up for reminders you'll get my Generation Z mental health resource guide that's for teachers and parents and counselors uh to help them help this generation get better feel better do better um and and and you know see all the good that they are inside so I'll see you next week but until then remember remember you are so much more than you think you are [Music]
Ruthless Compassion is a podcast about how you can turn your emotional into fertilizer for success and see your darkest moments as opportunities to transform into a powerful kindness warrior. If you enjoy this podcast, please leave a review wherever you listen. Welcome Dr. Fred Schiffer to the Ruthless Compassion podcast. Hi, I'm delighted to be here. Nice to meet you. Same here. And our listeners as well. Well, the first thing I always like to ask my guests is for you to introduce yourself to tell them a little bit about who you are and what you do. Okay. I'm a psychiatrist and I have a clinical practice of adult psychiatry and for many decades I've also been a researcher at Harvard and I have developed a theory of psychology which I hope that we'll be talking about and from that theory there are a number of applications that I think can help people with their emotional struggles. And what made you decide to become a psychiatrist when you grew up? Well, in medical school, the psychiatry was the last thing I was thinking about. I went into internal medicine and had a fellowship at Harvard in in cardiology. But my research was on stress and heart disease and I developed a called the quiz electroc cardiogram and it was like a an exercise test but for stress and and we published two papers on that and then I felt that I needed to learn more about the mind but I wanted still to be a psycho cardiologist. So I completed my residency at at MLAN again at Harvard and we were going to have like a cardiac rehab program out at MLAN and MGH got involved and it just got too political and didn't happen and and then I found that the cardiologists and the cardiac patients weren't interested in in plumbing the depths of their minds and although I did find that that it could have been very helpful but I I by that time had become very interested in psychiatry and actually love it. So it's it's been a a deep passion for a long time now. So I've always been kind of researchoriented and so I started thinking about my work and I wasn't seeing sort of the Freudian terms that you know that we had studied and people didn't come in with a super ego and an id and an ego and although I knew what those terms meant but I I was seeing that they seem to have two minds that they came in with kind of a immature impulsive symptomatic mind and and then as they got better they became more like an ego and were more mature and then they'd have a regression and they go back to this immature impulsive person. And so I I just made note of that and I I was talking with my colleagues about it. Nobody was interested in it but me. And then I started reading about studies that were done in the 1960s called the split brain studies. And in in those studies for people with intractable epilepsy, epilepsy that was uh ruining their lives, that if you have seizures every day, you can't function. And so they decided to try a radical approach. And that was to cut the connection between the left brain and the right brain. Uh and I saw a connection between the two people that I was seeing in my practice. And what they found when they cut the uh connection between the two minds, the two minds are there's a nerve bundle between the left brain and the right brain. It's called the corpus colosum. And what they did was they cut it so that the seizure wouldn't go all the way over and it would lessen the seizure. And and from a seizure perspective, it seemed to be helpful. But I think they were more interested in doing the research. And what they found was that when you made that cut, you took one person and you created two minds in one person. And what that means is that one person wanted to smoke with with one hand controlled by one side and his other hand kept putting the cigarettes out. Another woman wanted to wear a dress and she's trying to put it on with one hand and the other hand apparently didn't want to wear it and was unbuttoning it. And there are all of these examples of uh this syndrome of there being two minds. Uh one uh split brain patient was able to write with scrabble chips. They asked him what he wanted to be when he grew up and he said a draftsman. But that was what he said when he spoke. But when he used the Scrabble chips, which were a way for his mute right brain to communicate, he spelled out race car driver. And the interpretation was that the two sides had different aspirations and different wishes. So what you're saying basically is that if we become conscious that there are kind of two different aspects to ourselves, we can understand some of our desires, our motivations, and even our problems. Yes. Yes. And later I discovered that well I knew that the eyes were connected to the brain. That's what the split brain studies did. If you show an image to the left side, it's only seen by the right brain. And the right brain can't speak, but it can give hand signals. And so if you show a picture of Adolf Hitler over here, the patients would give a thumbs down with with their uh so the right brain is answering uh with their hand. The left brain can talk and would if he showed it on the other side and whoever was in the picture, he could tell you who it was and what he thought about him. So both sides had political opinions and were intelligent. So, I was reading a German study where they were purporting to show movies to one hemisphere or the other and to get different emotional responses. And I thought, "Wow, that's really interesting." And they tracked eye movements and mask a computer screen. And so, this was a like a million-doll machine they had. And I figured I could do the same thing by just going like this, covering one eye and half the other eye. And I didn't respond to it at that time. Later I did and do now. And but I went to the office and I asked my first patient to try it and he was a Vietnam veteran who uh had a purple heart and had I think four tours of duty and and had PTSD. He was doing quite well. And I asked him to put his hands up and he was looking out his right visual field like this and he got all upset. He said, "That plant behind you looks like the jungle." And he's obviously having a flashback and he's in Vietnam. So I said, "Well, look out the other side. So go like this." And now he's stimulating his right brain. And he says, "Oh, that's a that's a nice certain plan." And I knew what I had. And so I I do this in my therapy with him and with all of my patients. about 20% don't particularly respond to this lateral vision but most of the patients do and and about 55% have an intense response and if you wanted to try it it's easy to do and people uh who are watching can try it if they have like an echo I use my book here you can cover one eye and half the other eye and if you think of something upsetting and from zero 0 to 10. See how much distress you feel and people can do that at home. So it's very simple. You cover one whole eye. And the important thing is that the eye that you're looking out is half covered. So you're looking out the lateral half of one eye. And if you look out the whole eye, it won't work because that goes to both brains. But we have an MRI image showing that this actually stimulates the opposite brain. So now I want you to notice from 0 to 10 how much distress you feel and there may be no difference or there may be a difference. So now I want you to look out the other side. Okay. Do the same thing and and again think of the same upsetting thing. Do you feel any difference or the same? I think I feel a tiny bit different but it's it's hard to tell because I'm suggestible. So maybe we have placebo control studies and clinical trials. So we have a whole bunch of research and and actually this theory that we have we've studied at Harvard for 30 years and we have more studies and evidence than any other psychological theory. And we've used imaging studies and all sorts of high technology protocols and clinical trials. And right now we're running a study um using a powerful LED. It's called photobiomodulation. We put an LED on the forehead over the positive hemisphere. And what we're finding is that I don't know who's getting the active or who's getting the sham treatment. But what we're finding is that about half the subjects are dramatically improving and about half are getting worse. And so we're hoping when we break the code that the people who are reducing their fentanyl, this is fentanyl addiction, the top 10% have an average of 90% decrease in use over um they begin to decrease their use very early in the treatment and and it's a 26 week study. It's for the FDA. So when you say an LED, what do you mean exactly? Well, actually I have one here and I'll show you. So, this is an LED and I'll turn it on and oh, it's not plugged in. Okay. But it becomes a a light essentially. It's a it's a near infrared light and and it gets placed on the forehead and the light was selected because it goes through the skull into the brain. It's considered by the FDA to have no significant risk. and I've been using it for 15 years and haven't had any side effects from it. So there are no known side effects in the literature or in our work which is very unusual. You know even Prozac has a lot of side effects for sure. Well, you've written a new book called Goodbye Anxiety, Depression, Addiction and PTSD: The Lifechanging Science of Dual Brain Psychology. And so I want to ask you, you know, how do you apply this light treatment to your patients who have addiction, PTSD, depression, anxiety, and how do you find out which side you're supposed to put this light on in terms of this dual brain? Sure. Good questions. So it's what I do is what we just did with looking out one lateral visual field or the other. And someone who responds like that Vietnam veteran will have a you know he had a huge difference you know it was like nine out one side and and none out the other and about 55% of my patients have these intense responses and another 30% have like one or two point difference which is clinically helpful and so I have special sunglasses that allow them to look out. It simulates. It does the same thing as the book blocking, but it's more comfortable and you can see out it out of it. And so with the the visual test, we know which side is healthier, which side is more traumatized. And the troubled side is always the same. It's like a child who's living in the past trauma. And so it makes it a lot easier to understand their symptoms when all of their symptoms only come out on one side. On the other side, they they feel good about themselves. On on the negative side, I look bad and I look like I don't like them. And on the other side, I look empathic and and appreciative. So, it's really fascinating to work with this. And so the aim of what I call dualbrain psychotherapy is to help the troubled mind in the person. It's a sort of an inner child that's still living in the trauma and it thinks like a child and behaves like a child but it can dominate and the two sides sort of fight for dominance. Uh Steve Martin had a movie with Lily Tomlin and her guru dropped the hummingb and as a result Lily Tomlin's mind from this terrible accident got embedded in Steve Martin's brain and so he's the embodiment of the two of them and you hear her screaming at him that she wants to go downtown and he wants to go uptown and what I find is that this is really what I see in my patients that their two sides can be fighting each other or there might be a troubled side that is dominating and the patient doesn't know that they have a positive side and so I'll use the light therapy and it's not FDA approved so it's not on the market and the one the lights that are on the market I don't work this was developed at MGH and has really good parameters and it's patented and so we're trying to get FDA approval for it with this fentanyl trial that we're doing and then we can make it available. But if anybody has an envelope, a piece of junk mail that they got, they can use that to feel better. That if you're upset, you can use this eye blocking technique and for a majority of people, they can reduce their stress. And that simple technique can be just very helpful right right out of the box. So, I want to sort of dial back a little bit because you've talked about the word trauma a few times. You mentioned it and I think it's really important for you to talk about what trauma is and how how it happens because everyone has a different idea of it and I want you to specifically share what you think about it. Right. Right. So, I have a very broad definition of trauma. I think trauma is whatever hurts us, whatever injures us and if we, you know, can process the trauma successfully, they it can be an advantage. But usually it's a disadvantage. And what happens is say that there's a parent who's discouraging or dismissive, that then leads to pain and lack of confidence. And then the the child won't do well in school and maybe gets called ADD and and put on medicine or in a special class and and it interferes with peer relationships and the only people they can relate to are other troubled people and so they wind up getting into drinking and drugs and and they drop out of college. And so the trauma which is usually inapparent and the patients don't realize that they've been traumatized except when the trauma is you know very severe like a violent father or a molesting person that then it can be obvious even then sometimes it's either repressed or or denied. So, I think that trauma could be a sibling who's bullying or insulting or it could be a neglectful parent or a divorce or again I think it's anything that sort of injures us. I I really appreciate you saying that, you know, having a slightly lower threshold because a lot of people, you know, say, "Oh, you can only be traumatized if someone holds you up at gunpoint or if you've been to Vietnam or something and if your parent is neglectful or dismissive, that's not a trauma." and then they blame you for your problems later on in life if you're having, you know, problems with your work or with your relationships or with substance abuse or with mood disorders. So, I appreciate that because I agree with that actually. I I think that we're a lot more susceptible to uh the events in our childhood and I think that it has an impact and whether we're conscious of it or not. I wanted to ask you something else though because you know you're talking about the dual brain and how one side is functional let's say and one side is you know like your little wounded child. Why why is one side okay and one side not okay? How does that happen that we have one side of the brain that remains intact and one side that carries the damage? How does that happen? I I don't know. And another question that's related to that is uh sometimes the troubled side is on the left brain and sometimes it's associated with the right brain. And I like to say that it's not the left brain or right brain it's the mind of the left brain or the mind of the right brain which are different. And so I've, you know, thinking about why does someone have their trouble on their right side versus their left side, which tends to maintain itself. In other words, if if someone's troubled when they look to the right, it means their left brain is their troubled side. And the left brain, a lot of people in the field, a lot of scientists believe that the left is good and right is bad. And I thought that too. But what I observed was that about half the population feels worse in their left brain when their left brain is stimulated. And this simple visual technique that we just did, we did an fMRI study. And what fMRI is, it looks at blood flow in the brain. And the images that came up, they showed that when you look to the left, your right brain had a an increase in blood flow relative to your left brain. and then it switched when you looked out the other side. And it's it's really an amazing thing. Now, in my thinking about it, I think maybe it has to do with the type of trauma and the age of the trauma. You know, something to do with development. And it seems to me that the healthy side doesn't really come into play until sort of late teen years, early 20s. And a lot of people that I see discover their healthy side in my office for the first time. And if I put the light over the healthy side, the light is stronger than the visual technique. It's about two or three times stronger. But it's the same thing. Essentially, we're trying to activate the healthier hemisphere, the healthier mind. And it works. And I think every patient in my practice wants to be it's a study. So it's an IRB covered study that they participate in. It's for depression. But I I think everybody in my practice likes the light treatment and once it and in the study we've done three studies for addiction and they've all gotten but two that are completed have remarkable results that are published and we're able we have a sham device. If you put a metallic sticky over the light the person doesn't know it but they're not getting any of the light treatment. So that's a placebo. And so we compare that with the active treatment. And there's a huge difference between the active treatment and the placebo. And I also have placebo glasses that instead of blocking this way, block like this. It does nothing. But there it's a good placebo. And placebo does not get the same response. And now let's pause for a quick word about my other podcast. Since I was a kid, I've loved watching movies. As a psychiatrist, I'm blown away by how film touches us at our core, deepens our self-nowledge, and can improve the human condition. I wanted to let listeners know that I've started a new podcast called Real Mental with Dr. Marcus Ceroda. I'm going to be talking with directors, writers, actors, and critics to help people figure out their lives by getting to the truth about mental health on the big and small screen. Some recent films covered are Anora, Amelia Perez, Will and Harper, and The Last Showgirl. Please subscribe to Real Mental on Apple Podcasts or wherever you listen to podcasts. You know, when you're talking about trauma, you're saying how in your mind most problems, most psychological problems, including mood disorders and addiction, come from an ADHD, things like that, come from trauma. Yes. But we parse them out and label them this, this, this, and this. And I I have felt that way for a very long time. that trauma is at the root of everything. And I wrote a book, I think it was published in 2012, called emotional overeating, know the triggers, heal your mind, and never diet again. And it people didn't really respond to it very well because I was saying how addiction is caused by trauma. And if you address your trauma, you'll lose the urge to engage in any kind of addiction. And I really said that all addiction is caused by trauma. People didn't want to hear it. I actually spoke with Dr. Vincent Fiti who was part of the adverse childhood events study at Lomolinda in California and he was very interested in discussing with me the issues until I started talking to him about treatment of trauma which is that you have to deal with the inner child and heal the wound of the inner child and he thought that was completely woowoo and said no I can't I can't and he withdrew and I just thought you know how incredibly sad because you know I was a psychotherapist for many many years and I was dealing with trauma all the time And and I just felt so sad and I still feel sad today because I have a book out all about what you're talking about that no one's interested in because somehow people don't want to hear about trauma. They don't like the idea that trauma is a cause of things. They don't want to actually have to address the trauma, face it, grieve it, let it go, learn self-love and self-care. Like people don't want to go there, right? So I just was wondering what your thoughts are on that. Well, I absolutely agree with you and I think you're spot on and the therapy that I do is to try and treat the trauma. I help the person understand it and and having these two views makes it clear. In other words, when I look like their angry mother on one side and look like a friendly face on the other, it kind of shows them that their pain is coming from their mother. And I use their healthy side as a co-therapist. And I try and teach them how to get along and how to get the healthy part to model and show that life could be better and that and the the light treatment helps with that and that if they feel better after the light treatment it's like well you know this is what it could be like. that sometimes after a light treatment person has a positive response, they come in the next week and they're regressed and the troubled side is saying in effect, wait a minute, you want me to retire and go out on disability, the hell with you and it rebelss and I have to work with that. We'd call that a resistance. And the other thing that is painful about dealing with trauma is that when the person feels healthy, they can see how the trauma harm them. And that's very painful to see. And so a lot of people at that point will either flee from therapy or uh that it's hard to bear how destructive the trauma was. And then going back to what is trauma, there's something interesting too and that is that Joe is called an alcoholic and he's opening eight beers to help go to sleep at night. So he goes to AA and he says, "Hi, I'm Joe. I'm an alcoholic." which is insulting because no matter how much lipstick you put on the pig, calling somebody an alcoholic is like, you know, calling them a son of a gun or whatever, a loser. Yeah. And what they lose track of is that they only are opening the beer because of their prior trauma. And so they're getting a new trauma by being called an alcoholic and a defective person. and they lose sight of the fact that the drinking is due to a whole series of rolling traumas. I absolutely agree with you and I I've actually said how I feel like addiction it's a dysfunctional coping strategy to an original wound that then creates a new wound that becomes the the quote unquote problem and kind of buries the original wound and that you have to go back to the original wound because the drinking is the symptom of the wound or whatever whatever it is that and you know the other thing I found after a million years in in practice and that's the advantage of being older right you you have experience it's that when I start diagnosing people, I do assessments now. I do psychiatric assessments and I'm diagnosing people all the time. And you know, the diagnosis seem to be very overlapping as I get older. You know, like borderline personality looks like complex PTSD, which looks like PTSD, which looks like ADHD, which looks like severe anxiety, which looks like OCD, which looks like bipolar. everything starts overlapping and you start wondering how random and arbitrary are these categories. I mean, I know we have to diagnose things because the way it is. All of the diagnosis are traumatizing, right? So, if you tell somebody they're bipolar, you mean I'm crazy? You know, and uh there's a joke where a guy goes to see a psychiatrist and he says, "Okay, doctor, what's the matter with me?" And the psychiatrist says, "Well, frankly, you're crazy." And the patient gets very upset. He says, "I demand a second opinion." And so the psychiatrist says, "Well, you're ugly." And and that's what these diagnoses are like. And you want another opinion? Okay. Well, you're borderline and and you're bipolar and you you're a learning disabled person. And you know, rather than understanding why the person is having trouble with their emotional life and their functioning. Yeah. I I was looking at Dr. Gabbor Mete's book scattered minds about attention deficit and how you know he thinks that it's caused by trauma. He thinks that everything's also caused by trauma. He's a trauma specialist as well. And you know I think this field of trauma is a very difficult field. Just like you say that you know a lot of your patients want to walk away from the therapy because it's so painful. I think a lot of clinicians are very afraid of looking at trauma. You know they don't want to face maybe their own trauma. Yeah. and if they have to start looking at their patients trauma or the subject of trauma, there's something that they have to avoid within themselves. So, they'd rather just pretend it doesn't exist and, you know, walk away from it. But I think that we need to look at trauma and I think that down the road, you know, probably after we're both gone, trauma will be the thing, right? I think, you know, in 30 or 40 years or 50 years, trauma will be what everyone's talking about and everyone will be treating the cause rather than the symptoms. But we're still, I think, in the early early early days where people are still wanting to fight with us about this kind of a thing. Now, you didn't have a response to this lateral visual thing. But somebody who feels very anxious on one side or starts to cry on one side and looks out the other side and feels fine, they then have like a wake up. It's like, whoa, what is this? And what does this mean? And so it really begins a discussion for the patient that leads to an understanding of their trauma and that one that trauma exists and then it leads to an understanding of the nature of the trauma and their feelings when they're looking out their negative side. What do those feelings remind you of? and uh reminds me of my father when he was angry and and those associations are so it's just like you know psychonamic therapy that I did over the years but it's with a certain clarity that I see more what therapy really is about. It's a different way of treating the trauma by getting the healthier part of a person to participate and to give the troubled inner child a role in a new person. sort of like a corporation. So I say, "We're not going to put you in the corner office, but we're going to give you a job you're going to enjoy and and maybe it's in marketing or something." And and so we want to use the whole brain, but not have the trouble side leading because the solutions that the trouble side makes usually fail. Yeah. When I've been doing psychotherapy with people with trauma, I say if you think about about it like the Freudian ego, super ego or child adult parent, I say you need to grow your adult self because that's the competent, rational, responsible part. And the child you can bring in their creativity, their curiosity, their spontaneity, their passion, their excitement. And then you need to also identify that critical, you know, super ego parent voice and recognize when it's trying to mirror those same messages that you heard growing up that you're not good enough or that you you're going to fail, don't bother, you know, you're useless, whatever. So, you have to sort of silence that inner critic. So, it sounds very very similar to what you're doing. And yeah, it is. Yeah. And and the light now we're treating fentanyl addicts, which is like, you know, my mind is like treating cancer. And you know, these are people who are severely addicted. They've all had, I would say, the average is three overdoses, near life terminating overdoses. And so, it's a rough population and getting them to come in and, you know, it's a lot of work and and MLAN is doing half the study and I have a startup where we got the grant and we're doing half the study and we're only using the light. So, there's no psychotherapy. We'd like to, but it's hard to fit psychotherapy into a clinical trial, especially for the FDA, but these people seem to be getting better. And in our other studies that are completed did get better and there was a dramatic difference just with the light. And in my practice, I have one patient who was abused by a relative, a very young age, sexually abused, and she was having an erotic transference in her therapy with me. And there was one session where I put the light over her healthy hemisphere, and the erotic transference stopped. And in other words, it it stimulated her healthy mind. And it was from you know her trouble mind as she was having this erotic transference and it was really enlightening and and really helped her progress and she's really doing very well now. You know, it strikes me that having this physical technique that you can use with people, something that can actually affect the brainmind physically with the light might be the thing that helps the scientific community finally accept and acknowledge the fact of trauma, the damaging pervasive effect of trauma on human beings. Yeah. Because they can have something tangible, right? they can have a physical tangible thing that makes a physical tangible difference in people's lives. And once we have this physical thing, this understanding that something can affect change in this way, then they can kind of go backward and go, okay, so trauma maybe is real and okay, so maybe trauma can be caused by all these different early life events. And then maybe they can also start to rethink diagnosis and mental health and addiction and recognize what role trauma plays and how we can differently address it moving forward. Right. Yeah. I agree totally. Well, I can wish. Right. Just one thing that I would want to add is that what the light does is it stimulates one of the brain hemispheres and we know that it increases blood flow. But the thing that it really does is it changes the mind. In other words, it switches them from this troubled mind, an immature mind to a healthy mind, a healthy mature person. And if I put the light on the other side, the person would get more symptomatic. And sometimes we'll do that to show the difference. And usually I just put it on the positive side. But if somebody's advanced, I use it on the negative side. And then the positive side again to show that you can talk to each side. And sometimes I think that if someone walked by and heard my sessions, you know, they think we were crazy because I'm talking to two different people. And I teach the patient how to talk to themselves both ways. Well, the gestalt therapy is like that, right? They take one part of the psyche and they sit you in it's called chair therapy and they sit you in a chair and they go, "Okay, talk from your little child now. Okay, talk from your adult self now." So they are doing the same thing. So I think there's been a lot of a lot of schools that have recognized that there is a division in the psyche. What you've done is you've really recognized and written about and done studies about the fact that there's a physical division and now you have some physical technique to sort of flick the switch to activate the healthier part of the brain and the mind so that it becomes the dominant part as opposed to how the more ill part tends to be more dominant. and to stimulate the ill part so you can talk to it, right? And and explain to it, you know, that it wasn't your fault, you know, and and and I want to sort of plug my book if I can. So, it's it's on Amazon and it's called Goodbye Anxiety, Depression, Addiction, and PTSD. So, that's all of the the DSM5 that I could fit on the line, and it's called the life-changing science of dual brain psychology. And you know, I think that what you're really saying is that when we have self-compassion and don't see our diseases, our mental diseases as character flaws, but we see them as results of our traumatic earlier events, right? And we have some specific techniques that we can use to heal, then you know, it's not because we're a bad or lazy person. It's because we've been wounded. And if we have that self-compassion and we have some techniques for help, then we can really change our lives. Like you say, it's a life-changing science. So that makes me feel very hopeful for the future and for people who are suffering. Yes. Well, Dr. Schiffer, it's really been a pleasure talking with you today. It's it's such a fascinating topic and again, it's hopeful. I'm going to ask you my last three questions of the day, which is where can people find you if they're interested in learning more about what you do and your books? So I have a website called dualbrain psychology.com. It's a just one word dualbrain psychology and then there are links to Amazon and if you just write my name on on Amazon my books will come up. So there's an earlier book which has a couple of editions called of two minds and you might also find that of interest but this is my latest book and it has narrative descriptions of therapy sessions and it talks about the science as we've talked about it but in a way that I think doesn't crush the mind you know it's it's kind of easy to understand. Well that's that's very helpful. And question number two what are you doing these days? like what are you working on these days? Well, I have a private practice in the same place that I've been for a long time and uh we're finishing this NIH grant. Now, the grant may be shut down, but I think we have enough money to finish it. And so, our site should be completed at the end of April, early May. And then MLAN hospital is doing half the study. This is to get FDA approval or it's part of the FDA process. And the FDA gave us what's called breakthrough designation which is to help bring our methods and device to commercialization so that it could be made available to the public. So I'm eager to break the bind, see who got the active and sham and whether the people who are getting better are getting the active treatment. And so I'm busy with that as well. They're the two main things. And then I also have an interest in the physical nature of consciousness and the fact that you can change a conscious experience or subjective experience with a light. And so I write papers about that and I'll be talking with Harvard biologist Michael Leaven in two weeks. We're going to be on a podcast and so that's another interest of mine. is sort of the nature of consciousness and and subjective experience. No slouch you are. I'm going to ask you my final question, which is what would be your call to action today for the listeners? Something that they could think about or something they could try doing. I would say I would urge them to get some junk mail and to use it to try the eye blocking thing. And remember, it's half of the eye that you're looking out. So it's a lateral visual field and the reasons for that are explained in the book and also I would say a call for action is read the book. You'll find it very interesting and and very informative and there's also a self-help chapter and so I think the book actually is is helpful to people who want to understand the mind better and people who would like to feel better. Well, that's wonderful. Dr. Fred Schiffer, thank you so much for coming on the Ruthless Compassion Podcast today. It's been such a pleasure talking with you. My pleasure. Thank you. This is Dr. Marcia Serota. Thank you for listening. Please leave a review and your comments wherever you listen to podcasts and don't forget to sign up for my free newsletter at marcaserotamd.com where you'll learn about upcoming online events as well. Also, we love getting referrals from our listeners about future podcast guests. So, please email us at info@arcaseramd.com.
hey welcome back to the laser therapy institute podcast my name is dr jason rountree i'll be your host again today but i'm joined by a very special guest we have dr fred schiffer here with us he attended drexel university school of medicine where he earned his md and that was followed by residencies in internal medicine and psychiatry as well as a cardiology fellowship he is a board certified physician and psychiatrist he is a research associate at mclean hospital he's an assistant professor of psychiatry part-time at harvard medical school and he was a speaker at the 2021 photobiomodulation summit he's also a published author and he currently sees patients at his office in newton highlands massachusetts as well as via telehealth dr schiffer welcome to the podcast hi pleasure to be here i'm very excited to have you here we have some really interesting things to cover today a couple of neat concepts a couple of things that are being done with photobiomodulation or light therapy that really is stunning so first though let's let's kind of start back in the beginning if you don't mind tell me about your interest in medicine where did you get started with this whole thing uh okay i think you mean my interest in uh photobiomodulation well yes i'm very interested to know how you got involved in photobiomodulation or are you interested in how i got into medicine and psychiatry here i would love to hear a little on you need like your initial interest in medicine sure in medical school i had no thought of going into psychiatry i was i did an internship in internal medicine and residency and internal medicine and then did a fellowship in cardiology at harvard and and um and that fellowship was a research fellowship on stress and and uh heart disease and um and then to complete my education uh i did a residency uh in psychiatry uh at mclean and uh i was thinking of becoming sort of a psycho cardiologist and uh and what i found was that uh no one was interested in that but the cardiologist gave lip service to stress and stuff they didn't really want to go deeply into it and and it turned out that it it was there was a lot to in that field i i did a rotation at mass general and i was in working in the icu and everybody who came in with a heart attack had a very interesting psychological story and um uh uh one guy uh just notice for the cardiologist he just had a heart attack and came in but when i spoke to him uh his father died when he was uh 10 years old and his mother would wring her hands and say oh what are we going to do what are we going to do and he would say don't worry i'll take care of it and he did that all his life and and so the night of the heart attack he was out to dinner with his business partner and they had some problems and and business partners said well you know i'm going to take a vacation and uh and and his usual response was well don't worry i'll take care of it but uh this time he couldn't and had a heart attack and and and he could relate to that and and uh so there really was a lot to that uh field but but it i wasn't able to uh promote it uh and so i became a a standard psychiatrist and and i love psychiatry and and uh um um and uh but i i was always interested in kind of thinking about things and not not just learning road techniques and and uh so at that time uh freud was uh uh the the and freudian psychiatry was uh uh in in vogue and and and you you didn't see a psychopharmacologist they were kind of weird people on the periphery and uh uh so this was uh uh 1975 i started my residency at mclean and it was a three-year residency and um and then i stayed on at mclean as an attending psychiatrist which essentially meant i had a private practice at mclean and then i had an outside private practice and and and i was noticing that my patients didn't seem uh to have um uh the uh is in egos uh that we talked about they're the superego in other words when i saw a patient it wasn't like like i understood what the id was and what the ego was and uh but it wasn't what i was really seeing uh was uh that the patient was in one personality when he was regressed and then as he got better he was like a different person and it was a whole different personality and and and that's what really struck me and and i tried to promote that idea uh about two minds and and um and it didn't go anywhere uh and um uh it's very hard to promote a new idea and uh and then uh in 1990 uh i was on vacation with my family in england in the english countryside and i was reading a book uh about the split brain studies and i had you know studied it in college but i didn't really understand what it meant so uh the these uh studies um uh were done for people with uh terrible epilepsy that their lives were they completely disrupted by constant seizures and so there was a drastic uh treatment uh which was to cut the connection between the two halves of the brain so the brain is sort of like a walnut has two wrinkled halves which is the left and right brain and there's a stem between the two and the stems with the corpus callosum and uh so the the foot brain operation uh was uh i'm gonna turn off my uh uh mail oh sure okay um so the footprint operations were uh done by dr joseph bogan and uh and they were dr roger sperry who won the nobel prize for the these studies was at cal tech and he was the physiologist uh in the studies and and uh they went on for about 10 years and and so the the important finding there are like a lot of weird stories about a woman is buttoning her dress to put it on and unbuttoning your dress with her other hand and and it was hard to kind of make sense of what this really meant but as i reread it uh what i saw was that each hemisphere of the brain in his foot brain patients had a mind of his own uh that that when you cut the the corpus callosum you actually had two intelligent people uh and uh and they both understood english and could do commands uh very easily and had a sense of humor and um uh the the difference was that the left brain could talk speeches as we know uh in in most people is in the left uh hemisphere and and uh so the right isolated right hemisphere was mute but he could talk with hand signals uh it could point to uh uh scrabble chips uh in in actually in one patient he he could spell uh words and and uh uh he's he's his left brain speaking said that he wanted to become a draftsman and uh pointing to scrambled chips he wrote a racecar driver uh had you had to say to uh you see uh different personalities or different intentions uh right but they're both intelligent so they both understood the this sort of complex question but what do you want to be when you grow up he was a teenager and so if you showed a picture the uh the eyes are connected to the brain in an interesting way and i have a diagram of it if you want to see that that'd be great okay [Music] so the way the eyes are connected to the hemisphere so here's the split brain patient the connections is uh cut here and if you show an image to the left side it it goes uh through the lens and hits the medial retina and crosses over uh and stimulates the uh goes first to the back of the brain but actually stimulates the uh the brain in that uh the person uh the the right brain only can see the picture uh if you ask the the person who can speak in his left brain he says i can't see it and then if you have a box here with 10 items in it uh with his uh uh left hand which is controlled by his right brain he can easily reach into the box and and pull out the chest piece the uh right arm and right hand is connected to the left brain and if you put the same box on the other side the uh right hand has no idea what to pick because as the person told you you didn't see it uh and if you put the item over here uh the right brain can't see it and the left brain will say uh oh it's a chest piece it's a um it looks like a uh uh i think it's a queen you might be a king huh um yeah okay and um [Music] so uh uh what i found the that the most important aspect of the slow brain studies was that you had an intelligent person in the right brain uh who could answer questions and uh actually these are uh this is roger sperry uh over here this is joe bogan and this is iran zeidel who who actually died a few months ago uh and i went out and did a study with uh bogan and zydell as uh sperry had died by that time and um um and so this these are studies that uh sperry did where they'd put a word on one side of the um so both sides could read and uh so one side of the screen tooth goes only to the uh right brain and brush goes only to the uh left brain and uh and so he the person will say brush because he can speak and then he can reach over and pick out the tooth so i did a variation of that i did the first study uh which was a psychological interview of the two hemispheres and so uh on each side of the screen are different words uh each uh hemisphere sees uh the they they each see 35 words and and they're pairs so here it's a admired or disrespected ashamed admired attracted dishonest and uh uh uh trying to uh have positive and negative words and then the uh person would point with his uh hand to uh there were five pegs um and uh and and his response would be uh non-mild moderate predator extreme and we got very um consistent responses and and what we found was in in one patient uh his right hemisphere was happier and and and so the positive responses were higher in the uh right brain than in the left brain and the negative responses were lower and and this was statistically significant the other patient uh had been bullied as a child and he told me that it didn't bother him it happened so long ago uh but uh when i asked the the questions uh his uh left-hand uh signing for his right mute right brain said that he was extremely upset by the bullies and and i put in a bunch of bully questions i kind of made up and um so yeah this was with a split brain patient yeah correct okay okay yeah okay uh but it gave me the idea that maybe um uh uh what uh what i was um uh seeing uh where i was seeing two different personalities in my patients rather than a need and an ego which which exists and which i understand um uh maybe there was some connection between the footbrain studies and and so um uh uh uh let's just give a little so uh werner whitling was a german uh uh scientist and uh he developed a very complex device to show movies in normal people to one hemisphere or the other and it was very difficult to follow what his protocol was he was tracking eye movements and masking a computer screen and and i had to read it several times to understand what he was doing and and and then i i figured out what he was doing and and he was just showing the movie to the lateral visual field so he was really doing the same thing that's very did uh putting the the picture to one side and so i came up with uh my own version which i could afford a lot more direct you just cover that opposite visual field then okay right right so so and then i had the goggles uh made uh and and then they i think sort of hurt me because they look sort of goofy but they were very effective in um and what what we found was that uh if a person looked out one side and i didn't and it could be left or right and varied within people uh their personality would be very different and they would say that i looked very critical on one side and they didn't like themselves and they might have drug cravings and then i'd have them look out the other side and i looked better and they liked themselves more and their cravings went away and uh and it happened immediately it was a so the first time i tried it i just i i tried it myself and didn't respond uh i i did respond uh about five years later uh uh in an interesting uh uh way um but my first um trial with this uh i had a um my first patient that day was a vietnam vet and um uh and he had severe ptsd had a purple heart and i'd had uh three or four tours of duty and and his face screwed up uh when i asked him to look out uh at one side and uh uh and i i think it was his uh uh uh right visual field so it would be his left brain and and he said that plant behind you looks like the jungle and i said really uh and i said look out the other side and he smiles he says no it's a nice looking plant and i i knew that i had something and and and the rest of my when i do this with patients all the time now i i get um about 55 of people have these really strong responses and and about another 30 percent will have a uh positive response but it might like their anxiety level might be like a one or two point difference uh between sides uh this guy would would go from like an eight to a two wow and uh um so uh the hypothesis is so what i call this is dual brain psychology and and then uh just started at dual brain institute to teach i have seminars to teach clinicians how to do this because it's it's tricky in how to learn it and how to put it into your practice but it's very useful in in psychotherapy uh to have a person who feels really depressed and they don't see any future and they look out the other side and they they feel better and then there's hope and and um so one question would be you know is it always the left side is it always the right side no that's a very important point that i thought uh and i wrote some papers on it that i'd like to retract i never did uh and they're they're well sighted um uh they decided all the time and that is that i thought all the i wrote papers thinking that the right brain was like the unconscious or the negative hemisphere and that's sort of the popular notion but what i found is it's about half and half and that a lot of times ptsd is more in the left brain uh but but i think uh it's it's impossible to know uh it's possible for me to know unless i test somebody which side is uh more positive but but everybody who responds has the same response it's that one side feels good i look good and the other side uh i i look critical and and and their personality changes their physical uh appearance changes uh in in people who have intense responses and and they're they'll often say to me you know my chest pain went away i didn't know they're having chest pain i i've i've had uh patients uh uh have i just generally feel better and and their pain often decreases uh it's it's uh often i i had some examples uh uh uh kind of amazing so i did a a a study um um so here's a this is kind of the theory so here there's a healthy side and a uh here's a real mean looking guy there actually this is an interesting um i let me let me before i get this is a maybe i might come back to this if we have time this is a transcript from a patient who had a strong response and you see the psychology but it's not just that he feels good uh it it involves his the problems that he had he i treated him for cocaine addiction he did well and i had him come back and um oh i'll read a little bit of it here uh uh and so i asked him uh how he feels i don't know which side he's looking looking at uh uh and i'm getting away from your question so i so i don't know which side in a given patient and we use that uh to study uh uh rtms and i'll show you that and that's how i got to uh photobiomodulation okay so it's coming up here but but i'll just say read this uh quickly uh uh i asked him how he feels anxious because i can't see what might be coming at me from the other side just a new feeling or familiar feeling i'd say sort of a familiar because i'm in business and you never know what's about to happen definitely unknown now it's interesting he doesn't connect with his psychology it's just you know he feels [Music] uh would better try on the other goggles uh so i had two pairs of goggles and uh uh how much anxiety are you feeling looking out the left side so this is his right brain uh i think glass mild can you describe the difference between how you feel on one side versus the other i'm more relaxed on this side on the other side i'm more uptight let's put the other pair back on how do you feel same as before not as comfortable i'm just thinking about things that i did in the past and everything about me then i really didn't think about anybody but myself and the abuse and some of those things i've been through in life it's not what i want to remember not good can i take them off wow it's really you know intense but uh i just want to ask one more question and say i okay can you relate these uncomfortable feelings to your father i see i treated him for two years and so i knew this you know that his father was important uh to his uh addiction uh i don't know i was never comfortable around my father with these glasses on it's sort of like dealing with him again because it's always the unknown always a pressure and a problem yeah you feel the unknown you have the tension and then he talked about the unknown in business but it really ties back to the unknown with his father we didn't know when his father was going to criticize him uh and uh so and i asked him later on it what would it take him to use drugs and he says he was looking at the good side i would never do that and i said how about the other side and said you know i think i could see myself doing it on the other side um wow so this is a my book here um and and joseph bogan wrote on the uh cover uh wonderfully readable well-informed this is the best book ever on the social and psychiatric implications of this foot brain research and and candace perk who discovered the opiate receptor said the schiffer rivals freud in his revolutionary theories on understating the human psyche now i learned later that she was talking about ludwig freud who was sigmund's uh brother who was a baker i'm sure not uh so uh so this is the second edition which uh uh has a a preface that brings up the uh this first came out in 1998 and has a lot of transcripts like the one i read to you and then there's been a a whole bunch of research that we've published at mclean uh since the book came out so that's it included in the uh second edition when when did the second edition come out in august of this year brand new awesome yeah yeah okay um uh so i i took my goggles down to alvaro pasqualione who at that time uh was a well-known researcher he still is and uh but he at that time he was uh a pioneer in uh uh uh transcranial magnetic stimulation which is a treatment for depression and uh and uh for for reasons that aren't clear to me uh they always stimulate the left side and uh so i predicted that if your left side was your negative side you wouldn't do well and if it was your positive side you would and uh and so he took the glasses and then i had trouble getting him to answer my emails or calls and so finally i i actually had to go to his office and and and and so over here is the data from a paper that we published and and this uh column here are the people who felt worse in their left brain so when they look to the right they have more depression and then they look to the left that's what that means and this is right visual field versus left visual field that's very positive okay yeah so down to the bottom it says that so so that the the um uh it's how depressed are you so if you're more depressed uh uh in the uh right visual field um well i know that this is the the negative uh this is uh the left negative um um i'm getting confused when i uh uh look at the label here but i'm not gonna uh belabor that but uh the people we predicted to do poorly did poorly in other words the the uh this is the hamilton depression rating scale and this is the change uh two weeks after a two week treatment and and so most of them have uh less than a 20 percent uh improvement which is not good uh 50 percent is considered a decent outcome and all the people who had that except this one left-handed woman um were predicted to do well in other words their left hemisphere was by this simple goggle test positive and and and they responded very well to the tms um and um and i replicated it with a a group in canada so these are two papers that we publish and we got the same result in canada and there was a sexual difference between males and females males responded they were a little more predictable than females and we got the same gender difference in both sides uh and uh and i just want to i think there's a picture up here um yeah here uh so this is a fmri study showing that when people were in the scanner these are seven people from our lab and and they look to the left for 30 seconds look to the right for 30 seconds and then repeat that and then this is the the combined data of seven people if you look at one person you don't see this but with the combined seven people uh and then uh we can intensify the image uh it shows that uh so they're looking to the left here and it actually activates the right brain this is by an fmri which which shows blood flow uh in in the uh brain rather than in one hemisphere relatives to the other and then when they just look the other way uh it shifts so so that we have um uh uh fmri evidence that this is a real phenomena that's happening and it's happening in broad areas of the brain so it's just like one little area that's just you know in the back of the brain the observable area um it's the entire hemisphere almost yeah yeah it is and um um uh and then this is interesting this is a paper that we have uh we're about to submit uh that we we have a computer test to instead of using the uh glasses or uh hands or an envelope and um and what we found was that the nucleus accumbens the laterality index which is the left there are two nucleus accumbens so most people don't think of it that way there are two hippocampus there's a left and right and a left and right amygdala so if you take the left minus the right over the left plus the right you get what we call laterality index and and what we found was that the uh hemispheric valence uh which is what the test result is in other words uh if you're more depressed on one side than the other uh then we uh we'll um we'll say your uh left hemispheres is uh positive uh plus uh five or something and um uh so there's a correlation between the the laterality index of the nucleus accumbens it's highly significant with the valence so if you if you have a left positive valence if your left brain is positive your nucleus accumbens on the left side is larger than if if you have um sorry uh if if you um uh so if if your left is positive your nucleus accumbens is larger uh uh uh on the left side then the right side and and the same with the hippocampus with the amygdala it's actually smaller on the left side and so it's very interesting so you have the the reward center and the fear center in opposite directions uh just with with the the hemispheric valence that we're measuring um uh either with the computer with this we use the computer test but you can use either uh the the goggles or an envelope for that so uh i couldn't uh carry a tms machine uh up to my office uh so i i wanted um uh and i couldn't afford one yeah so uh i wanted something i could uh because i tried to get alvaro and other uh the the group at mclean that does a lot of tms trying to get them to stimulate to put the the magnet on the right side of the head and people that the simple test showed uh might benefit them and and it turns out that the tms has a benefit of about fifty percent uh in about half about half of people benefit from it and and um and so if they uh followed uh this test uh it might be possible that they could double uh uh their efficacy and their efficacy is just borderline it's uh and people usually have to go back and and get retreated and so it doesn't work in a lot of people and but i couldn't get anybody to to uh put the magnet on the right side so i i gave a cold call to the wellman center at mgh it's the enrollment center for photo medicine and uh and i said i knew a little bit about a near-infrared light and um and had used a near-infrared spectroscopy in some of my earlier studies and so i knew it went through the skull and [Music] so my first question was would it be safe to put on the head and the person i spoke to said well if you don't hurt the skin you're not going to hurt the brain because the power falls off exponentially and so i i got passed around a few people who weren't really that interested and then uh uh there was a guy and we sort of hit it off uh we had like a nice connection and his name was mike and i had no idea who he was and and um uh and uh and we got talking and and uh and we decided to do a pilot study and and uh and uh we we got great results from it the the uh mike turned out to be mike michael hamlin uh uh who uh has written 700 papers on photobiomodulation and written or edited 17 books and so up with the right person you stumbled into the right person for sure he's done so much for photobiomodulation yes yeah yeah um uh he's he's really the leader and and uh so i might have the results uh uh um so yeah this is the so this is the paper we published um um in in uh uh 2009 uh and uh there were ten patients and a lot of them none of them were active uh substance abuse users but they had histories of uh substance um abuse and so this was the device that uh we made uh uh mike um uh heard about this led that had just come out and uh and so uh this is a a computer fan on top and a heat sink and you can see the heat sink here this is the uh the led itself so it's it's a homemade device i had an engineer in cambridge make the power supply and and these are two uh near infrared spectroscopy uh pads uh the somanetics device and uh and we really didn't need the goggles but we didn't know that then so we we have safety goggles on and um and then we've found that there was a change in blood flow more in man than in women and and and then two weeks after one treatment we had a dramatic decrease uh in the hamilton score went from 29 to 11 uh two weeks later and then it went uh up at four weeks to 17. so it was still uh about half of what it was initially um and this is just a sorry this is just a unilateral application of light no we're not talking bilateral which i think we've seen a lot of studies that you know irradiate both sides of the head or the entire head well now this is uh actually bilateral although we did some measurements after each side and there were uh significant unilateral effects but we weren't uh i didn't want to get into uh dual brain psychology because it was too weird and it was hard enough to get irb approval at mgh we did the study at mgh and uh so uh we decided to to do both sides uh but the interesting thing is that although uh we got these uh uh really great results um um um this is uh okay this is uh the the depression the anxiety score is actually a little bit better and nobody said boy i feel great or uh wow can i have another treatment in other words uh the only way that we knew that there was any effect was we gave them the hamilton at two weeks and hamilton at four weeks and the scores showed an improvement but the patients themselves uh it weren't like the guy with looking at one side or the other with the goggles and it had this huge change you could see immediately um so at a meeting at mclean someone suggested well why don't you try it in your practice as an off-label uh uh treatment uh the the unilateral treatment so i i did that and um and i got uh from the get-go amazing results and and um um i have uh a audio recording i can play for you if you like um uh would you like to hear that uh yes a patient being treated okay so uh here's a guy who had uh trauma as a child and um he had a lot of operations and had a feeling of hopelessness because they always went bad and they had to be redone and and um and so he suffered a depression his suppression was better but he he he was coming in once a month and um uh and his complaint this time was that uh he's an amateur songwriter uh he has another job uh and uh so he hasn't been able to write and we we felt that uh it was related to the pessimism that he had as a child and so what we did was i i do a lot of weird stuff i'll use a sham or uh sometimes a patient will say to me doc it's not working and i go over and i look i didn't turn the right button on and uh uh if you put it over the negative hemisphere uh you get a an aggravation of of their symptoms so you know it's not uh horrible and and they don't go crazy but they uh so in this uh patient i put it over his negative hemisphere and then uh his positive atmosphere so you can hear the difference just just right before you hit play on this one if i can just try and because i think we might have um i mean this is so complex if i can just try to say back to you kind of what dual brain psychology is before we see these effects basically you have and this is not for a split patient this is for your average patient that's right but you have two different personalities two different people one in the left one in the right and it is varied per person as to which side is more mature versus which side is more childlike i guess and so more traumatized so it's only a child but it's a traumatized child okay and so then when we say when you say the positive hemisphere is that the more traumatized side no no that's the the more mature healthier side perfect okay so the negative side is more traumatized the positive hemisphere is the more mature side right okay and and if you treat that with tms the patients tend to do better okay if you treat the immature uh traumatized side you're stimulating it and so they do worse i see okay but it's not uh you're not treating uh in this to make the side healthier uh what we're doing is we're stimulating the brain like with the magnet so the magnet isn't repairing anything it's just stimulating uh uh hemisphere yes okay perfect thank you for letting me kind of recap good okay so [Music] that's the fan on the device oh and i've got a picture of a very angry man that he's looking at and the picture is symmetrical it's the same half of the face on both sides so if he looks at out of one visual field or the other it's the same picture let's see look the question is how do you feel about writing music i feel like uh i don't feel good about it i um i feel like it's worth picking up the kind of real discourage um there's a lot of uh a lot of stuff that i'll write and then immediately i put the pen down because i feel like it's automatically not going to come out worthwhile it's not automatically does that have anything my experiences in the hospital where uh where where i automatically felt um or automatically experienced like unexpected uh unexpected complications and it just seemed like everything always went bad and uh it's the same thing i feel like referring to this this project when i write it's like almost not even worth trying because it's not going to work out like you know that's that's i feel like it's that's what i see as a pattern as he gets treated it's a little worse but but it's sort of the way he came in i don't think i do very well [Music] yeah definitely i feel like uh attention [Music] all right so let's move it over to the other side okay usually the effect takes about two and a half minutes and it's a four minute treatment happens about two and a half minutes if i i'm going to stay true on another side yeah so now you're switching yeah if you do the the positive side after the first uh f to the negative side uh the patients well and and and uh it's as if you didn't ever did the negative side is so much it's like diminished so much [Music] all right now how does a guy look in the picture that looks funny i mean this is a ferocious [Music] maybe it looks like he's laughing and this is the same picture he already looked at yeah is in the same place and he's looking with both eyes this is photobiomodulation i love writing but i feel like you know i still feel like there's a part of me that's afraid or hesitant but i'm not like it's not a sense of it's not a sense where it's not worth doing well could you write something now yeah i feel like a little more um inspired to write or uh i don't feel like i'm impeded by my automatic assumption that's gonna be bad so yeah i would say so yeah i feel very different now that's like flipping a switch yeah now it takes again about two and a half minutes whereas the envelope for some reason works immediately just generally feel like that you know i walked in here it was a great day and now it's not so great anymore that's the best way to describe it like the lens the lenses are a little more the tent is a little lighter but there are opportunities for you [Music] go down the place okay i think wow that's that's wow um so um uh what uh what i do with this is um uh see if i tell him uh you know you're safe now uh and uh you can go ahead and write and so it doesn't mean anything and it'll be useless but uh what i'm doing is creating an experience where he he can feel his power he can feel that he's safer and and that's uh very compelling it's sort of like groucho marx uh once said uh uh what are you gonna believe uh uh what you see with your lion eyes or what i tell you and uh explains to the patient what his problem is and and and what his trauma is and also uh usually the trauma is hidden you know in other words these people there are patients of mine who who've been uh brutally traumatized uh vietnam bad or a lot of childhood trauma uh but uh uh probably the majority of people are traumatized uh in a way that they don't understand uh uh as a trauma uh in other words uh one one patient uh had a very intellectual family and and um they always had debates at the dinner table and uh and the result was always uh that my patient had the better uh uh responses but the other guy won the debate he was an older brother and and uh this you know caused a lifelong suffering so it doesn't look like a trauma you know looks like it's a very healthy family and they're doing this constructive thing but it turned out that actually it was traumatizing to to the patient and um uh so uh so part of this work is to discover the traumas uh and um and then you you can uh bring them out or uh uh or bring out the mature side where the traumas don't uh exist uh much on that side and and so with um uh with drug abuse uh what i found was that the patients would come in with very strong cravings i'd give them a unilateral treatment and the cravings would go away i i would look better they would feel better about themselves and and uh and and they wouldn't uh uh you know they would have no uh desire to use uh one patient uh came in he he had an overwhelming urge to gamble and uh and i said well you know i have a casino in the back but unfortunately there's a cover charge uh and uh so we had an auction and and we got up to two thousand dollars that he was willing to pay to go to my imaginary casino and yeah he knew you know i was an imaginary uh but but it was a you know we we both got into it and and uh and then i treated him and he wouldn't pay me anything yeah uh-huh and uh so uh we decided to test it uh uh with uh uh drug addicts who i didn't know so this is a tree this is a uh a test um uh of people from craigslist to uh the criteria was that they had to have cravings they didn't have to be using but they had to have uh four out of ten cravings uh on the telephone and uh and uh and it's very hard to study psychotherapy and and there's so many variables and so we just studied uh putting uh the light or a sham and a sham is is the same device with the piece of foil over the light and and the patients can't tell from the device which it is they can tell by how they feel uh and and uh and actually in this uh study that i'm studies i'm going to describe uh the patients all thought they got the actual treatment and they didn't uh so so it was it's a really good sham uh treatment and uh but but so the patients come in from craigslist i don't know them uh we're very friendly you know we want them to come back and you know we're pleasant and uh so there there is that and they all came back and they got paid uh and and uh you know so it was uh i think about thirty dollars and section and you know which was a lot of money for them and uh um and so we we i only had one dropout uh and uh and so i did a portion of the study from a startup company uh called mine light that i have and uh and and the other group uh was in mclean hospital and this is your i'm sorry this is your most recent study that was just published well right that's right yeah the the earlier study because i didn't know if we'd get the grant uh i funded myself and did it myself uh i had 17 people come in from craigslist and and um so let me let's see if i have this study here so this is the first study that we did and and so this was a within subject trial so there there were 17 uh people who came in i think we had about three dropouts and uh and the first week that they came in they got either a sham uh or um an active treatment and uh and i treated the negative first and then the positive because i wanted to see if there was a difference between the positive and negative hemisphere and um uh but we we treated the positive hemisphere second so i may have reduced the results by treating the negative hemisphere i i don't know that uh but i wanted to get that other thing so this was the first study that we did and uh uh [Music] so the the first week they got shammer active and the second week they got the opposite treatment and the third week they got a follow-up and we measured um cravings and we we looked at use we didn't have enough data to get a good use analysis and that wasn't a requirement for uh coming into the study and um and we also measured depression and so [Music] what we found was that there was a decrease in cravings [Music] at the week three in the group they got the active treatment they had a 55 decrease versus an 18 decrease uh in the sham group and that was a uh statistically significant with a healthy effect size of 0.73 0.8 is considered a high effect size and and effect size is sort of the power of uh the effect so if if if you give a prozac uh you have to wait around and three weeks and you look at tea leaves and try and figure out whether it's working or not so that has a low effect size so you need 3 000 people to see if it works so that way that wasn't me the computer decide i gotta change slides so this is uh the hamilton depression scores so they came in at uh 15 and went down to nine which is uh quite nice uh now this is a week after the treatment so right after the treatment we didn't see a difference a significant difference between the act and the active and sham but a week later it was that difference so so that that's interesting that it took uh uh it wasn't like in my office where we got the the immediate results and and and the patients didn't they found it pleasant but they didn't have these amazing responses i i don't know why uh uh you know it might be a patient selection um but they did have a um a week later a um uh uh highly significant decrease in depression which which is of course important and this was just after the one four minute session of active light treatment that's right yeah and and and but it's a week later uh if i uh and you can't do a hamilton uh immediately after anyway you know it's just it's a little too complicated this is a study showing that the uh active treatment was much better than the um uh it's into the positive hemisphere was much better than to the negative hemisphere it was significant uh uh when the light was off there was no difference so so uh it does indicate that there's a positive negative hemisphere uh and uh uh so we we couldn't look at that a week later uh uh and then so this was the second study which was funded by um a small business innovation uh research grant from the national institute of drug abuse and nih and um so in this study uh we recruited um actually it turned out to be 39 studies 39 patients and and what we found so this is all 39 in this graph here this is from the paper uh so uh people either got an active treatment where they got a sham treatment and they came in twice a week and they came in uh for four weeks so this is the treatment period this is the follow-up and you'll see that this is the active group and this is the decrease in um cravings from the baseline so uh it's a ten point scale and and so there's a five point decrease in the ten point scale so they didn't come in at ten they came in let's say seven and they go down to two so it's really a difference between whether you're going to use or not uh if if your craving is two you're not going to use if it's seven you're going to use and and uh so so this is uh these are uh clinically significant uh results uh in my opinion well especially sorry just especially since we have such a huge issue with opioid abuse and overuse and and overdose deaths i mean we were at they were they were saying 90 000 plus uh deaths related to opioids just in 2020 alone and this is a major problem and there's not a lot of really good treatments to help control brain and again this is just a four-minute light treatment that's what that's what this uh uh picture is here okay there's no other treatment but photo modulation and and pleasantness we were pleasant but we were pleasant in the sham group and there was a a placebo response you know it went down a point and a half at the follow-up now now the effect size here and here at the week after the last treatment and again we we saw that a week later we got better results than immediately uh i don't know why that is but um uh but uh the difference between here and here and here and here is 1.5 uh the effect size is 1.5 uh a high effect size is eight is is point eight rather so this is twice high and and it's a and the p value is off the chart you know it's all zeros uh and uh so uh again all we did was so i think we could you know go out into the community with a light and and treat people and and and get good results that lasted three weeks um after the treatment and uh we weren't able to do a long-term follow-up we just didn't have a manpower for it yeah that's hard yeah and um uh and uh just some other things here so uh in in the uh whole active treatment group there was a 70 decrease in uh cravings uh in the sham group there was a uh about a 30 decrease so there was a a healthy placebo effect but it was uh you know half of the uh the treatment effect so the treatment was significantly improved over sham and that shows i think too that you had a good sham it's a really pretty clever just doing everything the exact same just covering the light with foil that's really simple but highly effective yeah and and and everybody uh uh you know except there were about two patients who did really poorly and and they thought they got the sham that's why how they did you know but but uh most people thought they got the active treatment when when they in fact got the sham and the axis treatment people thought they got the active treatment uh and uh and this just shows the the group comparison and uh and then uh uh the results uh mine light is as a company and uh and we we got uh highly significant results and mclean uh got very similar results we both got down to about minus five uh actually looks like mclean did slightly better uh uh um uh although their sham group did better uh that required for some reason um um and and then uh people on buprenorphine uh uh did well with the treatment so if if someone was on buprenorphine uh with the sham treatment they didn't improve further than what the buprenorphine did but but the uh uh the people who were on buprenorphine uh with the active treatment uh had a uh went down to four so it wasn't you know quite as as as good as the um uh looks like i think this group i think actually went down past five uh to about six um um so that's again it's a ten point scale and if you if you go down six points uh again if you come in at a seven and you go down to a one uh that's remarkable uh yes in my opinion yes and and uh so i i could see this as an add-on to buprenorphine here uh or a standalone treatment and uh and then this is a drug use and at mclean they got a much better uh decrease in drug use and i think the reason is uh they had more people who were using drugs than we had in my life and and using drug use was not a requirement uh but it turns out that we got significant results with drug use so this is decrease in drug use over the course of the treatment and and uh so these are days of use and and in the sharing group there they tended to be increases uh and uh and this is the same thing with uh the uh uh uh look back uh follow back uh method so this is the days times the amount of use and you see really a healthy uh decrease in use and again it's a sub population because most of the people weren't uh using but it was out of the 39 i think about 14 or so we're using uh uh where it came in using and and uh and and decrease um and uh and this is uh days of uh so the the treated group had uh almost 100 days less of use than a baseline uh whereas the sharing group had nine days less baseline so there was there was a a healthy uh uh improvement in in use as as well as um so these are opiate screens what we found was that the patients often had negative urines um uh when they reported that they had used and i think because there's a lot of fentanyl out there and that didn't show up in the urine test so the findings are based on dual brain psychology and they reinforce uh the dual brain psychology premises which they are that there's a different personality in each hemisphere related to childhood trauma and they show that unilateral transcranial photobiomodulation dramatically reduces opioid cravings and use and it's safe and this doesn't conflict with other medications yeah we had absolutely no side effects you didn't have a headache or a uh an ache or a pain we had no complaints and i don't have any in my practice um um it's it's uh and it's known to be safe it's not just my uh finding but uh uh and then it was concerned that well what if you put it on the wrong hemisphere you know you make a monster and no you don't uh you you know you you'll bring the person to his regressed state but he's been living in that most of his life and and so it's uh it's it's it's not a a great risk so you know the this is this is a big deal really if you think about the amount of problems we have uh at least here in the u.s with opioid use and cravings and and abuse and and like we mentioned before overdoses so you'd think that a really significant study like this it shows really good effects it's completely safe that is uh you know really naughty it's it's convenient i mean it's a few minutes of a treatment yeah and it's painless it's pleasant you know uh people feel better with it um uh there it really isn't a negative uh here that i can say you'd think this would be just everywhere like that everybody'd be on board and doing it right i mean that's what it seems like to me uh right now we're trying to get it through the fda and we have to do another study we have a grant application uh and it's another sbir grant it's a larger grant and if we complete that i think we'll have a good shot at getting fda approval so we don't have fda approval yet and and so we haven't uh uh go into a commercialization phase and we do have a patent one on the unilateral uh and we we have another uh um we had we had some other patent spending and uh so uh uh we're we are we're trying to commercialize it but we we uh uh you know would uh have tried you know to offer it to the city of boston and nobody's called me back i i i've i've made uh you know at least 10 calls at drug clinics and and uh uh halfway houses and stuff and uh um uh maybe it's too weird or something well you know if you're not familiar with photobiomodulation the idea of you know shining a light onto the brain just it sounds like it's crazy it says it sounds like it's not gonna change um and and maybe i'll say a few words too about the mechanism yeah so we know a lot about uh uh you know uh chromophores and and atp and and cytochrome c and and mitochondria uh this probably isn't working on that basis it does increase blood flow but that probably is a secondary phenomena i don't think it's the primary phenomenon my uh my guess is that it has to do with changing your mind uh and and for that i think uh we need to be thinking about uh quantum physics and uh uh and so uh i've written about uh brain information and uh and subjective experience and so what we're doing is we're altering subjective experience and uh that comes out of different brain information so i'm sure that the different hemispheres have different brain information uh but what we're doing is we're changing the subjective experience that's associated with that brain information and and uh so i i i think we get into quantum field theory and some stuff that i'm not really qualified to speak upon well of course me either but this is fascinating stuff um and i think you know you have to have seen i mean not you already mentioned it but you have to have seen your field change so much over the last you know 20 30 years i mean thinking about where we're going to learn what we're going to find out in the next 10 even uh has to be really exciting so it's it's pretty neat to see i think researchers like yourself that are willing to go out on a limb and say i know this is this seems weird but what if we put these concepts together and seeing neat results like this yeah it's really encouraging to neuroscience and that uh i don't think it's a small area of the brain that consciousness is related to uh and and i don't think that uh i think circuits are involved but they're not the key thing in other words it's uh we have to get back to minds and psychiatry has lost its mind uh and uh we've gotten their drugs in in place of it and and the drugs are not that effective uh you can get half normal with drugs if you're lucky if you don't get worse wow yeah well doc i appreciate your time today and if you're listening and you want to find out more about the two recent studies that dr schiffer and his team have published you can find those full studies at the links here in the show notes and you can also hear my breakdown of those studies by going back to episode 31 and episode 80. we'll put links in the show notes to that too where i actually run down some of the details directly from the research but you're hearing from the guy himself today and he has a publication we already mentioned it's titled of two minds the second edition just came out you can find that on amazon there will be a link to that book in the show notes as well and then if you're learning about photobiomodulation you want to know more if you're looking for the right type of device for you and your practice if you need assistance with safety and certification training or protocols and settings you can look us up laser therapyinstitute.org we have so many resources available many of them for free and really targeted to the individual in practice but doc i i really again appreciate your time and your attention and your efforts in this really important field do you have anything else you wanted to share with us before we go today well just to say thank you i've enjoyed speaking with you and and and the opportunity to share my work well thank you and i look forward to seeing more from you in the near future you
So this is a novel theory of um cerebral laterality and psychopathology and uh and and and I I think it has relevance to your work. Um um uh so uh the the uh way I came across this was that I was observing two different personalities in patients that there was when they came in they were very symptomatic and immature. they got better and they were like very normal, healthy, mature people and then they'd regress and they'd revert back to this other personality uh that was immature and troubled and then I was rereading the split brain studies and it seemed like there was a connection uh uh wi with uh the split brain studies which very clearly show that uh uh when you cut the corpus colosum for people with epilepsy uh you get two uh independent minds and um and uh so dualbrain psychology has a lot of research. We've been studying this for 35 years at Harvard and um and the idea is that trauma gets located more in one brain hemisphere than the other and it can be the left or the right side. And we think that the side that the trauma gets located in has to do with uh uh the age of at development when the trauma occurred and the type of trauma. Uh but we're not sure about that. But it does seem that in in um um uh in that most individuals uh the trauma is located on one side and it's easy to stimulate and I'll talk about that and uh and the other side the other uh side is quite healthy and and uh and this leads to uh uh clinical applications where where you uh want treat the troubled side and use the healthy side to as a co-therapist to help treat it and and uh um so let me uh so this is a whole paradigm shift from the usual uh psychiatry that's going on today with the focus on uh pills and and uh DBT T or or cognitive behavior therapy uh that we we try and dig into the trauma that is causing uh the the uh problem. Uh and so we we've used uh in our studies over the years uh a lot of sophisticated uh neuroscience techniques. We've had a lot of clinical trials. Uh right now we're we're studying fentanyl addiction and we have a uh uh uh a two and a half million dollar uh grant from NIH with a FDA breakthrough designation and uh and uh half of it's being done at MLAN hospital and and half at a startup that I have and uh and what I can tell you we we're still blinded but about half the people, so half the people are getting sham and half are getting active and about half the people are doing very well coming off of fentanyl. And these are people who've had multiple overdoses and and uh living um uh a number of them are living on the street and and uh so it's a real hardcore group. uh but in that group we we have many successful uh I I would say at my site uh about a third of the patients are doing quite well uh and and uh a number of people are dropping out or not doing well and and MLAN is finding the same sort of results and we we'll have to become unblinded in the Paul uh our our site is completing the study uh uh in about two weeks. uh the the uh uh the uh clinical applications that I'll describe uh are used in clinical practices and uh and dual brain psychology is the first psychological theory uh and application to come out of rigorous research namely the split brain studies uh which won the Nobel Prize and to be supported by uh 35 years of research mostly at Harvard. Uh so these are the split brain uh experimenters. Sperry uh Roger Sperry in the middle, Joe Bogan and Ran Zidell who work with him. Uh and uh and the idea with this book brain studies is that the uh corpus colosum um uh is um Can you see my cursor? Yep. Uh okay. So so this gets cut to try to treat uh intractable epilepsy. And as a result, if you show something to the uh lateral visual field, in this case it's the left lateral visual field, goes through the lens of the eye, hits the medial retina and crosses over to this side here. And only the right brain can see the image. uh you ask the right brain, the left brain which can speak only the left brain has speech and and he has no idea what was shown and uh and can't pick uh the item out of a box with several items in it. The right brain however with its left hand which is connected to the right brain can very easily pick out the item. Um so Roger Sperry showed a picture to the left lateral visual field and it was only seen by the right brain and the left brain uh she started giggling and the they asked the woman um uh why she was laughing and she had no idea. She confabulated and uh but we know why she was laughing. She saw a a Playboy nude uh uh presented by uh distinguished Robert Roger Sperry and um she thought that was a cause to giggle. Uh and uh the right brain has political opinions. You could show a picture of different political figures like Hitler got a thumbs down and uh one guy could express himself with scramble chips and he said he wanted to be a draftsman in his left brain and his right brain wanted to be a race car driver. And uh and after the operation, the the two hemispheres uh have a very different um uh aspirations and and attitudes and um one person wanted to smoke and his other hand controlled by the other hemisphere kept putting the cigarettes out. One woman wanted to put on a dress and her other hand uh kept unbuttoning it and taking trying to take it off. And so this is a uh setup that's very used. Uh he he'd put a a word on each side of a computer screen and it would only be seen by the opposite brain and so the left brain could speak and it would say uh saw the word brush over here and and uh it would say brush and and the uh right brain could reach behind the screen and pick out the item amongst several items. Uh so I did a study uh with Bogan and Zidell. Uh Sperry had died about two years earlier and um this was the uh I think it was the last split brain study done in California and it was the first one to do a psychological inventory uh of the two hemispheres. And so I asked um uh how much do you feel and two words would come up on the computer screen. One would be uh positive. There were positive words and negative words. So uh and each hemisphere got all of the words uh uh and we had graduate students look at uh pegs where the uh hands would point to a peg. There only four here but there were five answers. It was from none to extreme. And uh and we got very reliable answers. Uh and in one patient uh uh he uh was seemed to be much had a higher opinion of himself in his right hemisphere. And uh uh and he his positive on positive words he scored somewhere between quite a bit and extreme. whereas his left hemisphere uh scored an average of moderate and uh and the the other patient scored similarly in both sides but he told me with his speaking left brain that he'd been bullied as a child and I know that bullying is a serious trauma and uh so I asked him I injected some questions about his being bullied uh uh while I was testing him and u his uh right hand signing for his speaking left brain confirmed that he was not upset by the bullies. He said none none none and and but his right brain signing with his left hand remember in all the other questions they were similar here it was different uh and um uh he the right brain was extremely upset by the bullying even though the the uh uh left brain was not and uh so this is a a picture of Rener Whitling and he's a German scientist who made this elaborate device reporting to show movies to one hemisphere or the other in normal people so people who didn't have surgery and uh and uh it was I had to read the protocol several times till I figured out what he was doing and essentially he was showing the movie using uh eye tracking and masking a computer screen to one lateral visual field or the other. And I and I figured that on my budget uh I could uh do the same thing. Uh and uh so I tried this and I didn't respond. uh I did a few years later and I still do uh to this simple technique and I I'll I'll show you an fMRI study u that supports it. Uh and I asked my first patient that day uh and he was a Viet Vietnam veteran who had PTSD. He was doing well and he got very upset and he said that plant behind you looks like the jungle. I said really? I said, "Try the other sides very quickly." And uh and he said, "Oh, it's a nice looking plant." And and uh I see this kind of response in about 55% of patients. Uh and about another 30% uh have a s at least a two-point response, two, three, four point response. Uh and about 15% of patients don't respond. Often they do later. Um uh and uh so this is an fMRI study where we put people in the scanner with with taped goggles. So if they looked one way, they could only see out the left lateral visual field or or the right lateral visual field. And and what we see is that blood flow increased in the uh in the contrlateral hemisphere. And so that that this simple intervention of looking out one lateral visual field actually has a a profound effect uh and that people feel differently uh and uh they'll see me either critically or empathically depending on which side they're looking out. their world view changes and and the the view they have out one side is uh of a child uh through a through their traumatized lens. And uh then this is a more modern version of our glasses where you can flip them um and look out the other side. And in therapy sessions, uh, I have people look out one side and and and then the other and we go back and forth and and I talk to two people and one person. And so this is a a sort of a diagram of of the theory of dual brain psychology that one one side is healthy and it could be the right brain that's healthy or it could be the left brain. And the other side could be like this tough guy over here. Um and and u uh and often people come in and they don't know that they have a healthy side and we we demonstrated it for the first time uh and uh and and that the two sides uh are like two different people and they can fight and sabotage each other. they can compete and uh or cooperate. And uh um and so what I call dual brain psychotherapy uh is to to try to treat the troubled side. This is a a guy um uh I want to So it's about two minutes. You're right. Can you hear that? All right. Yeah, I can hear it. So, um, how much would you pay to go to my casino in the back? So, here's a gambling issue. 600. I had a picture of an angry man on the screen. Yeah. Now I'm I'm not hearing anything anymore now. What about 1100? I'm screwed that up. Uh Uh, so when I had him look out the other side, uh, he wouldn't pay me anything to go to my casino. So, we'll go to the next. I'm sorry. Um, um, so I got him up to $2,000 on one side. Let's turn up the volume here. Okay, we'll just go to the next slide. Okay, so then another guy after I made this discovery with um with my hands, I made tape goggles like I we saw in the scanner and I had a guy who I treated um u come back and try them and and he did very well. He had a cocaine addiction and uh and it turned out that uh his father uh was always demeaning towards him and um uh and so he put the glasses on. He looks out one side and he says, "I don't know. I was never comfortable around my father with these glasses on." It's sort of uh like dealing with with him again because it's always the unknown and it's always a pressure and a problem. Yeah. You feel the unknown. You have the tension. Then he looks out the other side. All he's doing is he's just looking from one side to the other. And it happens in seconds. Uh I can deal with him on this side. I know how to handle him now. And I don't think he'd get me upset. And I wouldn't do the counterproductive things if I looked at him out this side all the time. I'd feel more pity for him and for the relationship. And I don't think I'd want to abuse myself by using drugs. Uh and then this is a study where we did an fMRI study and we found that um uh people who had a a left positive hemisphere uh had a large reward center nucleus encumbent, a small fear center amydala and and a larger hippocampus on the left than the right side and worse on people who had right hemisphere positive. And uh uh so this this is just a diagram to to uh it's not to scale. Uh but I want to show too that there are two hippocampons. Uh there's a left hypocampus and a and a right uh uh hypocampus, a left amygdala. And all of the parts uh in the hemisphere are bilateral. And a lot of times people think just speak about the amygdala or the nuclear circumbent. And most researchers don't look at the lateral differences. Um, and then this is a DTI study uh follows the tracks and there were differences uh between left lateral uh left positive and right positive. And then uh we did a study uh with people who got TMS uh for depression. They got a two-eek course of TMS and we put the goggles on as a baseline. asked them to look to the left side and the right side and measure their depression. And those who felt more depressed looking to the right means that their left brain uh was negative. And uh and TMS for for some unknown reason is always treated on the left side. Uh and uh so we predicted that people with a negative left hemisphere would do poorly. And and that's what this shows here. These were people who had a a baseline uh that indicated a negative left hemisphere and there was only one woman who did well. She was left-handed. Uh and the rest this is a very a very poor outcome. And all the people who had a good outcome were predicted to do well. And and over here it shows that uh people who were predicted to do well had a 40% improvement in their depression uh two weeks after their twoe treatment of TMS. And people we predicted to not do well had an 11% uh decrease in depression. That was highly significant. Uh so I wanted another way to stimulate the positive hemisphere. And so uh uh I I thought of using nearfred light and I worked with um uh Michael Hamlin at at the uh Wellman Center at MCH and we did the first um uh treatment using uh transcranial photobiomodulation uh which is using near infrared light through the skull goes into the brain And uh uh we've had no uh uh adverse reactions. I've been doing it for 15 years. Uh at all and um uh and so we've had a number of studies using this and and turns out it's about two to three times stronger generally. Uh and so this is a guy who came in and he wanted a drink. uh he measured at seven of 10 and he'd pay me $500 for a beer and after a 4-minute treatment he he didn't want to pay me anything and I offered it to him for free uh and and he wouldn't accept it and we both laughed. Uh uh uh this is a guy who uh had been abused by an violent father and his I showed him a picture of this angry man that we used and and his leg was bouncing up and down about an inch uh uh per second. And uh I treated him and uh and he stopped shaking. His leg was still and I I just said to him, I said, "You're not shaking now." He said, "No." and and he measured his decrease in anxiety. It's extreme. Uh and uh this was a a con uh an NIH study that we did. It was a phase one study with 40 subjects. Half were done at Mlane and half at a startup uh that I have. Um and we use unilateral transcranial magnetic stimulation. We use the goggles to to see which side to stimulate. uh and uh uh and we put the light over the positive hemisphere and they don't get any therapy other than this. And so the the placebo group, which was half the group, uh went down uh 1.5 on a 10-point scale of cravings. The active group went down four and a half points. And that's the difference between using and not using. And the effect size was 1.5. The high effect size is 08. So it's sort of two point twice high. And uh we also had a decrease in use that was significant. And uh this is another clinical trial done earlier and um uh we were looked at depression and these were not severely depressed people. Um uh there this is their Hamilton score. I was just just on the cusp of depression but they went down from 15 to 8 uh and also on anxiety went down uh to um uh uh this is 8.8 and eight. This is eight. And uh uh this was with one treatment. Uh they either got a sham or an active treatment. Um uh it was within subject trial. Uh so now we have a new model device. Uh uh one side pulses at one hertz to inhibit the negative hemisphere and the other side is continuous uh to stimulate the positive hemisphere. And we're getting remarkable results with this. I'm running a study on depression now. And uh uh and and and the study isn't completed, but the results uh I'm not I'm it's I'm not blinded here. Uh are are this got a right now it's getting a 65% drop in depression right after the treatment. Uh so dual brain psychotherapy is where I talk to two people and one individual. somebody walking by might think we're crazy. Uh but and I teach the patient how to talk to his troubled personality. And so it's a whole personality on that side. Uh so this is uh my first book and and uh I just want to point out Joe Boen wrote uh and he's he was the neurosurgeon for this book studies. Um uh wonderfully readable, wellinformed. This is the best book ever on the social and psychiatric implications of this book brain research. I'm proud of that. And this is a a new book that I have that's more for the public. Um uh and I just want to show that I've got a lot of papers and uh u uh you can go on my website if if if you want to see it more. So this is where I want to just talk uh and then we can discuss. These are just some ideas about u m that Michael might be interested in. So uh um u in terms of u agency um uh I think an organism or an object must have knowledge and make decisions and learn. But then I ask uh does an agent have to have a subjective experience? And and to me that's an important question. And uh and I think that uh uh human experience comes out of brain information. I think the brain is an information processor and the two hemispheres have different information. Um uh and and the the more terrible the trauma, the more salience it has and and and the harder it is to get through to the person that the trauma might not recur. Um and um uh so the liver functions intelligently but I don't think it has a subjective agency maybe a proto agency and uh uh and the brain within each hemisphere has multiple areas that interact as a collective intelligence. So the amygdala and the nuclear circumbent and the hippocampus and the and the thousands of other areas within a hemisphere act together and and it's a collective intelligence and the two hemispheres uh work together either destructively or or constructively uh uh as a collective intelligence uh and uh general uh problem solvers uh um uh uh need um uh um an obstacle to solve. Uh and uh and uh uh life uh uh seems to uh confer a desire to survive and that can be o overcome at times. um uh but when pain becomes when life becomes too painful but generally uh uh every living thing wants to survive and and strives for that. I think that that's a very important drive and and uh and I think that life has a force. it it uh that it it it has information and uh um knowledge and and I I I think it's a force that's needs to be brought into physics uh more it's left out of physics because it's not mechanical um uh and um uh and some solutions of a general problem solvers are intelligent and others are foolish. Uh so uh all the the solutions that u u uh problem solvers come up with uh aren't um uh progressive or or helpful. Um and that that's why we we get into particularly in um in human life that humans are often very destructive. Another thing I just wanted to uh mention here that might be of interest is that uh why do we degenerate with age and there there's development regeneration and then there's degeneration which I think is an important uh issue that needs to be addressed and u so um um uh both um uh let's see um so it okay information must be understood by the agent. So learning and memory uh required knowledge is often destructive in people. So we we we you know we've been thinking that uh uh learning and and memory is a good thing and often it is good uh but uh but it often uh uh particularly with trauma is disruptive but not just with trauma. It's uh the the human being has has often done uh um um uh things that mention here uh uh um that uh there's a collective intelligence in in society. There are groups of people and and and we select groups uh and the groups have uh boundaries that u uh can move and uh uh and so it starts with the two minds and and and it's our first group and then it's our family and our neighbors and and then maybe people of a similar u uh political persuasion. Uh we often see the outside group as unworthy or threatening and different groups often become hostile and human history including the present is filled with atrocities towards each other and cancer and healthy tissues both fight for survival that cancer wants to live as well as normal tissues. uh and uh some potential experiments. uh I maybe using photobiomodulation as well as uh uh electromagnetic fields or or chemical um um um ways to influence regeneration and and uh and um uh and then I'm interested in xenobox and anthrobots and and uh and and I wonder if they could be used to see um uh uh what happens when uh uh there's a a transformation between life and and death and and and whether um um uh there might be a a sensitive photon detector that that uh uh there might be some experiments that might be interesting uh to study uh the nature of life and uh so um uh that's what I have to to show now. Thanks. Yeah, that's that's great. Um I have a couple of questions. Um maybe I I don't know if I've understood this correctly, but uh so so so since you you said clinically you interact with both personalities. Yeah. The the mature one and the and the troubled one. Does that mean that and and you and you're also saying that they map onto the two hemispheres. Does that mean that both hemispheres can speak because I thought I thought only one of them should have spoken language. Um uh one second here. There we go. Okay. Um so I didn't hear that. Can you repeat that? Okay. If if I understood correctly, you're saying that clinically you can you can you can talk to both personalities, right? That's right. Okay. And and Okay. and and you locate them in the two hemispheres. That's right. Okay. And so the implication is that they both can speak. Um is that I I thought I thought typically only under the standard case only one hemisphere can talk. Right. Well, that's an interesting thing that so if someone's u uh stimulating their right hemisphere by looking out the left lateral visual field, they can move both arms. They can speak. And uh so uh uh the the what I uh conceive of is that this is sort of a meta uh uh uh cognition or it's a in other words we're talking about a personality difference. Um uh it it doesn't it's not a split brain uh where where a person can't move the other side of their body with with with one brain. Uh so they have access to the uh to all of the instruments in the two brains but the personality uh uh and the mind uh that each hemisphere has a separate mind. Okay. And and and so it's sort of regardless of which one is speaking they're using the left typically the left hemisphere's language center to talk something like that. Yeah. Right. I see. And um okay and if you were to what what predictions does it have for example when they do the um the sodium penithol to put one of the hemispheres to sleep for I think it's 20 minutes. Well, actually that's very interesting and and in my book I I cite that that uh that actually most of the time uh uh uh they don't really see an emotional difference but when they do uh it's usually the person feels better uh when one side is put down and it can be either the left or right side and and and and uh and sometimes the person will will get very upset and cry and and so that there can be emotional differences and and uh and it can be either the left brain or the right brain that that is more negative is crying or or is happy but with with with the uh water test. I see. And um yeah, got it. and and in patients that either I mean there are rare patients that have that only have one hemisphere or sometimes people do a hemispherectomy. What are the what are the implications then for this kind of thing? Uh well I haven't I've never seen such a patient uh but in the literature uh sometimes there's a personality change. I don't know they don't really discuss clearly uh the direction of the change. Uh but the the uh the the thing that is most impressive is that they're human beings. So you can be a human being who's in who can uh appear as a normal human being with one hemisphere. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I mean I agree. I think that's remarkable. Um, we reviewed uh a number of cases and I'm sure I'm sure you've heard of them, but I wonder what you think where you you've got these rare patients who have drastically reduced brain volume in both hemispheres, but yet they have normal normal or even above normal cognitive performance. Right. Right. Although I I I think that um uh in animals the larger the brain usually the more intelligent except that in in some animals like parrots or octopus uh they they have they have very they have more functioning than you'd expect from the smallsiz brain. Yeah. Right. You know, t typically there certainly seems to be a relationship of course, but but you've got these occasional, you know, exceptional cases that say that it's not actually required, right? Yeah. And and what do you think about um evolutionarily uh this phenomenon you describe of the two personalities in the two hemispheres? H how what what is the you know sort of in in homminid ancestry and so on? Where how how where does this come from? when when do you think it it it first becomes notable noticeable? Uh I don't know. Uh I I think that um in development I think the healthy hemisphere seems to develop more later. Uh and um um uh and uh and it it might be that it's to rescue the person, but it it often doesn't get expressed. But when when uh when the uh when a negative hemisphere, if a child, for example, has a mother who who says, "You're a loser and you'll never amount to anything." And then he go and that's a trauma. And then he goes to school and he can't learn because he's going to school with a trauma. And then and then the teacher yells at him because he didn't do his homework and he becomes truent and and and he gets in with with a a bad group of kids. And then he gets into drugs or alcohol and and and and drops out of college and and all these things are cumulative and and and um humiliating. And he may never know uh uh till he he comes into my office that that he he has an intelligent side to him that that is uh less impaired and if I give him a light treatment uh he feels really good for the first time. It's it's it's these are really exciting things that we're seeing. Uh but I don't uh you know some people have said well maybe two minds are better than one and I I don't know uh uh but but all animals even flies uh have a duality in their hemispheres and uh and it might be just to have a a duplication in case one fails. um uh I I don't know but why why trauma would get located in in one hemisphere I I I'm not sure and uh uh and the other thing that I I don't have an explanation for is that when the uh uh eye blocking occurs just like this uh it happens in in in seconds that I'll have them look at a picture and the guy looks more scary and and he looks out the other side and and he he doesn't look threatening and and uh or sometimes a person will look at me out one side and I'll look critical like their mother was and out the other side I look like an empathic therapist and and uh uh so it really is like it's not just uh uh that their anxiety is more on one side or it's just one dimension uh but it's it's really a whole view of the world and the view of the world out the negative side is is the view of a child who's been traumatized and yeah very interesting and and and what do you think uh is the situation in in clinical cases where they seem to be much more than two personalities what's happening well I um when I published my first book I became friendly with a a psych ologist from New Jersey and and um and he had a practice filled with um uh patients with uh dissociative identity disorder, which is what they now call the multiple personalities. And what he found was that when he used my uh goggles um that all of the immature personalities were on one side and and all of the mature personalities were on the other side. And the same thing happened with um uh Richard Schwarz who who developed what's called internal family systems. It's a very popular therapy that's used. And his theory is that in the mind you have a whole uh family of uh of different personalities and he talks to them and uh and when he tried my goggles uh his patients felt better on one side and and worse on the other. And uh uh so uh I I don't have much experience with um u u multiple personalities. I I had one patient and and she was just too difficult for me to treat. She had profound trauma and she couldn't relate to me well and she found another therapist in New Hampshire and I was glad that she got some help. Uh but um uh these are people who were severely traumatized. Uh and um um uh uh but uh but I I I do think that um um uh that the uh that the younger personalities seem to be lateralized. Yeah. and and and one of the things that's most interesting to me is the way the the two sides uh fight each other and and and uh and a lot of times someone will go well uh and and the immature side gets upset and fights back and says, you know, you want me to go out on disability? You know, the hell with you. and and and uh and so sometimes getting well becomes a problem that we have to deal with. Uh and um so so you have some surprise reactions. It's not all uh that if a person's doing well, it's all good and they continue to do well. Yeah. But but in the end they most patients do very well and so Okay. And so that's I'm wondering about that. What's the um the best case scenario uh in the case of someone who is you know as as good as a human is going to get what what is the what is the situation there? What what's happening with with the with the two personalities there? Um well uh I I I can talk with my experience. I I had uh trauma as a child and uh uh and um when I was in college uh it they reared up and I had to get a lot of therapy and and uh and and and deal with it. And sometimes u u uh in the middle of the night uh uh Freddy will wake me up and I have to go down and talk to him. And um and and what I do in in my psychotherapy is I we we talk with in sort of a Socratic way to the troubled mind and and uh was it actually your fault? And and uh are you an alcoholic? And is that how you're defined? Uh sort of as um um u and you can never get you can never be well or do you have trauma that that alcohol became a solution for and uh and if we treat the trauma will the alcohol uh problem get resolved and and so there there are different perspectives. I don't know if I answered your question. Got lost there. Yeah. Well, I'm thinking I I just I I always with these things, I always try to think about what um uh what's the what's the the the most healthy case possible? So, what what does it look like when somebody has Okay. Yeah. Right. So, so, uh, I think with me, uh, I think, uh, uh, Freddy helps me and he works with me, but he's still a little boy and, uh, uh, and and I think he helps me as a therapist, you know, I can empathize better and, uh, uh, and so we work together and and and uh, and he's we're good friends and and uh, so I that that's the uh the best outcome. I think there there are people I've never had a neurologist put the goggles on and have a reaction and I think that maybe their two hemispheres are uh you know perfect or or maybe they're repressed. I don't know uh why why that is. What's interesting uh when I do podcasts uh I always ask the podcaster to try it. uh uh you can just get like a a letter or a a credit card and and do it and uh and they always respond and it becomes an interesting part of the discussion. Uh and uh so these are people who um uh uh are uh well functioning uh but but they're still carrying with them uh a side that's uh got got trauma and I think it's just that the healthier side it leads most of the time. Is it do you think it's possible but just broadly speaking does anybody become an adult? Obviously, it's a it's a spectrum. Some trauma is horrific and some is less so. But does does anybody become an adult without trauma? Is it avoidable? Is there such a thing as a background as a upbringing that doesn't include it? Uh I I I think that is and that may be a deficit in a way. In other words, it may be that there there are people who um um don't lack a certain depth because they haven't experienced adversity and and in our lab at MLAN Dr. Tisher has has talked about uh inoculation from trauma and uh uh but um uh but clearly there are people who who uh are are not suffering trauma but trauma also is pretty ubiquitous and the way I define trauma is very broad. I think it's whatever hurts you and and so it might be uh I I think that I harm my daughter who's very successful and doing well and we good marriage and grandchildren and and uh but uh I think that um we'd be playing dolls and and then I'd have to go to work and and and and uh and I think my you know working so much um uh was a trauma and and uh um and you know we had to work that out and we we have a great relationship now but but uh when she was in high school there was u she was very rebellious towards me and and uh and I think was expressing uh some of her pain. So, it wasn't, you know, that I was I was my intention was not to traumatize her, but but uh I also had a career that I was invested in and and uh uh and I I so I I think trauma can be disguised and and often a patient will come in and they have no idea that they suffered some trauma and and the kind of trauma that they suffered um usually was uh something that can be recognized as trauma. But sometimes it's just, you know, maybe a sibling was more successful or or um um a parent was ill. Uh and uh so so these can be traumas that aren't recognized ordinarily as trauma that you know combat is or blood and guts or you know are obvious traumas and and I see that as well. you I see both. Do you think that um is there is there a is there any kind of a possible world? So let's say you know if people didn't need to go to work and they you know that kind of thing, right? If you if you remove all of those kind of contingent requirements, is there any sort of upbringing that results in an adult that has basically zero of that and does not need any sort of therapeutic intervention at all? Or do you think that's an impossibility just based on uh you know living in in a community and having other people who don't do everything you want them to do and things like that? Is it is there any such thing as as an adult who doesn't need you know I don't know therapy psychoanalysis whatever it is is it even possible um probably not because uh and and if we look around uh there's so much um uh there's so many atrocities that the human being u um u uh commits uh and we see that even today or you know this poor woman who who from TUS was was, you know, taken uh uh by unmarked ICE agents and and uh um uh that um uh the human being isn't right generally. you know, there there's a just a a lot of um um hostility that occurs between people and and and uh and and whether it's just a limited resources uh that causes these fights or whether uh there's something about the the uh need for uh acquiring more wealth and and and and uh uh prestige uh that that causes the the aggression And uh but but um um you know the the you know human history is rife with uh humans killing other human beings. [Music] Yeah. and and also we were also rife with um u about half the people in a in a survey that was done recently suffer um a mental disorder during their lifetime. That's half the people in the globe. Sorry, say it again. Suffer what what kind of disorder? Well, uh it wasn't clear. It just said a mental disorder. Oh, mental disorder. and and um um and most of those uh last a lifetime or a lot of them. And so so there's a lot of mental suffering that goes on uh uh aside from uh human aggression just within uh the aggression within the person. A lot of, you know, suicidal behavior uh has to do with one side trying to kill the other side. And uh and and so uh the the conflicts within a person uh are often cause severe pain. And uh and of course uh different groups of uh of people you know competing uh uh with each other and having hostility towards each other uh causes great pain. So so the human being has done some wonderful and and beautiful things and has also done a lot of foolish things and destructive things. Yeah. Yeah. Okay. Yeah. Yeah. Very interesting. And one thing I should note uh in our right right now we're studying uh fentanyl addiction and and we're studying uh 130 uh participants half of which get active and half get shame and they only get the light treatment. And um and right now we're still blinded, but um uh a large number of of these individuals are coming off of fentanol. Get a little water here. And so they're coming off a fentanyl and their lives are doing well. They're feeling better and um and all we're doing is stimulating or what we believe we're doing is stimulating their healthier hemisphere. Uh and and we we determine which is the healthier hemisphere by this visual technique. And uh so it it may be that the sham treatment uh is getting the better results, but we don't believe that at this point. We think that um uh and in our phase one study u I I showed the results there uh that that uh the statistics were off the chart and and that uh the the cravings and use went down in in the people who got the active treatment, not the sham. and and I'm doing a study right now with with a new device for depression and and uh and and the results with that are amazing. So this is just you know stimulating the positive hemisphere. Now that doesn't last the light treatment will last about three days and and um and and and that can vary. It can be a little longer in some people and less in others and but uh but it seems to be stronger. uh but does the same thing as the visual technique and and it's just it's a four-minute light treatment that we're using in in our fentanyl study. And and to have someone who has had multiple overdoses uh come in and they might be homeless and and and come off of fentanyl, it's it's pretty amazing. And uh and and what determines the um uh you know the length of like why is it that number of minutes versus something else? Like how did you how did you settle on the number of minutes? Well, I I think it might be too conservative. What we uh we were excuse me we were concerned uh that we didn't want to do harm. So uh and so um we were reasoning that if we uh didn't hurt the skin, we wouldn't hurt the brain because the light uh decreases uh um um exponentially uh as as it goes into the brain. So about 6% of the uh intensity of the light reaches the brain. So the so if you're not hurting the skin, you're probably not going to hurt the brain. and we haven't seen any uh adverse reactions. Uh we've had a couple cases of the flu, but we don't think they're related to um uh we had to write them up. Uh you know, adverse reactions, but um we don't we haven't seen any that we think were related to the device, and I haven't seen any in my practice where where I use it under IRB supervision. Mhm. And um um uh so what we wanted to do was to make sure we didn't harm the skin and and there's a uh they're very conservative standards for using light on the skin and we uh followed those standards. Uh but compared to other researchers in the field, we're using a higher dose of light than than others. But um uh we we think it's very conservative and and we probably could uh be giving a longer treatment uh than than we are. But we'd have to study that. So right now uh the FDA has determined that our our device and procedure has no significant risk. Um yeah.
Welcome to Living Chronic, the podcast that explores the realities of living with chronic illness and disability while redefining how we thrive in our personal and professional lives. I'm your host, Brandy Shance, a disabled veteran and chronic illness warrior here to discuss the challenges, triumphs, and untapped potential of life with a chronic condition. Before we dive in, please take a minute to hit the subscribe button on whatever platform you're listening. Now, let's change the way we think about disability together. Hi, this is Brandy Sh and you're listening to Living Chronic. Today, I'm here with Dr. Frederick Schiffer. He is a psychiatrist and author of the books Dual Brain and of Two Minds. So, welcome. And there's actually much longer titles there, but I'm going to make sure to put those in the notes so that I don't mess them up. Uh, but welcome to the show. I'm so happy that you're here. Thank you very much. So I'm I'm really excited you're here because since you know I guess to say everything happened to me. I have done a lot of reading um about the mind the mind body connection. So I've really enjoyed learning more about what you do which is study dual brain. Uh so if you could just tell us a little bit more about that right now. Um, let me let me uh so I have a new book out uh and and uh I'll just plug it here. It's probably coming up backwards, but it's called uh goodbye anxiety, depression, uh addiction, and PTSD, the uh lifechanging science of dual brain psychology. And it's on Amazon. So um uh so uh and the the available next day delivery, too. Yeah. Okay. And my other book is is as as you pointed out, it's called of Two Minds. That's an earlier book. And and uh so um there we go. Okay. I just wanted to straighten that out. Uh so um uh where would you like me to start? Uh well, you know, some of the things that um were so fascinating to me was talking about, you know, that dual brain and treating um the immature, troubled half of the brain. I know you and I talked about doing a couple little tests. Um but, you know, as somebody who who I myself suffer from PTSD, um you know, reading about this particular type of treatment is fascinating. I know, um there's a lot of different ideas out there of ways you could treat PTSD. um cognit cognitive behavioral therapy I think seems to be the one that I hear about the most and of course I've also heard a lot about micro doing um LSD things like that but this you know really seemed very tangible to me probably because I keep reading more about the mindbody connection over the years uh so it just felt very tangible and like something you could really reach out and understand um whereas I think many of us who are not in the medical field hear about some of these these things and think h does that really does that really work what what does that mean but this did feel very tangible to me so why why don't I explain first u uh what my hypothesis is and maybe how I arrived at it and and what the uh treatment uh component of it is um so uh uh I'm a psychiatrist I was trained at Harvard at MLAN hospital and I've stayed there for decades and I'm still there. Um uh and um so I've done about 30 plus years of research with multiple publications and and uh and and and um um and a few books on on on this. Um and the idea is uh my my theory is called dual brain uh psychology and and and it's that I've learned over the years that uh each brain hemisphere can support a separate mind. Now they both have the same social security number and the same address uh and they go by the same name. But if you stimulate and it's easy to stimulate one brain hemisphere or the other, you get a different personality and and um um uh that uh so the the hypothesis based on years of research and and uh and research that has uh supported it with with a lot of imaging studies and clinical trials and serious research. That's unusual for a psychological theory. And um uh the uh so the idea is that trauma is the cause of all of the psychiatric problems that I've encountered. Now it may not be true of the whole world, but it's true of my world. and and that usually people don't realize uh how uh the trauma especially early trauma uh um uh affects them and and it gets stuck in one brain hemisphere and so the result is that uh on one side there's an immature traumatized person and on the other side uh you're the same person but the personality is very different and I'll look different out one side or the other and um and it's it's very easy to stimulate uh one hemisphere or the other with a visual technique and I also use photobiomodulation which we could talk about later but the visual technique is very simple and I'll use my book to demonstrate it. You cover one eye and the middle of the other eye. So, I'm looking out the uh lateral half of of my right eye. And uh so that's my uh uh right lateral visual field. And um and when I first did it, I just used my hands went like this. and and uh uh and I asked uh my first patient to try that and he was a Vietnam veteran who uh had several tours of duty and and had PTSD was doing quite well. But when I asked him to do that, he got very upset and he said, "That plant behind you looks like the jungle." And I I said, "Oh, well, but look out the other side." And um and he smiled. He said, "No, it's a nice looking plant." And uh and so in my practice uh uh when people look out one lateral visual field or the other uh um I can look different. I can look supportive on one side and and critical on the other side like maybe their parent was or someone. And uh and so the focus of dualbrain psychology or is uh to treat the troubled side and and u that usually uh when the patient comes in the two sides are fighting or the the troubled side dominates and doesn't give the health they don't even know they have a healthy side and and uh uh and so the the therapy is to try to talk with the troubled side as in a typical therapy, you know, what are you feeling and what's that remind you of and and and and where we go is to the trauma and and then I try and list the the healthy side uh to be sort of a co-therapist and also is very instructive to the uh patient to be able to with a simple technique feel better and feel no I can handle it and and it reduces their anxiety and their depression uh and um uh so just looking at one side in itself uh is isn't a a a cure uh but it's an aid and and and uh oftentimes if someone's upset about something they can grab an envelope or their hands and and look out that one side and actually make a big change in in their outlook and their feelings and and that's very helpful uh to to to my patients and and and uh to have someone in in your head who can feel good uh is surprising and unexpected and and uh uh and and can show uh the troubled side that there's Oh, and and uh yeah, I thought it was very interesting to to read about um um particularly, you know, again associated with that anxiety because I've been, you know, I I've everybody who listens to my show is very aware of the trauma I experienced in um my medical health. Um I definitely suffered a lot of medical trauma. I also suffer from PTSD from my time during um serving in the army and I have tried various things and I've often said that sometimes I feel like the anxiety is not there. I'm fine and then other days very small things trigger it and I cannot get past it. So learning a bit about dual brain made me think, well, you know, maybe there is maybe I know how to use that other side of my brain and it's just I don't know how to get past the trigger over there. So when you have a patient who who you're going through this with, you know, how do you kind of take that next step to figuring out how to overcome that traumatized side of the brain? Um, uh, okay. I I see the the the two sides as sort of like there was a Steve Martin movie in in the I think it was in the 1980s called The Two of Us. And Lily Tomlin uh uh was with her was meditating with her guru and there was a terrible accident. the the hummingb slipped out of the guru's hands and tumbled down a flight of stairs in in Manhattan. And as a result of this accident, Lily Tomlin's mind got embedded in Steve Martin's brain. And and so you so Steve Martin is the embodiment and and and you see him going like this where where Lily Tomlin wants to go downtown and he wants to go uptown in Manhattan and and uh and she's screaming at him and and he's telling her to shut up and and and this is really what happens in in real people. In other words, the two sides can fight for dominance sometimes. one as I said one one side and usually if you know someone's coming for help they're symptomatic so usually it's a troubled side that's dominating and uh so uh what one of the interesting things is just like uh real people that if someone said to Lily Tomlin don't take that from him you know go on downtown you know it would embolden her and and and if uh Uh if if Steve Martin said, "Now calm down now. Uh you know, we we need to work together and and uh uh and you know, stop yelling at me." And and uh uh that um uh you can actually affect uh the hemisphere by talking to it. And I talked to uh each person and and uh and I I actually have uh sunglasses that that were uh uh and that these uh stimulate uh one one hemisphere or the other. If you put them on, they look like normal sunglasses. Uh uh but they actually stimulate one side or the other. And uh so I'll I'll ask the patient to wear them to bring out the uh the troubled side and and talk to it and and um and say, "Wow, that must have really been difficult." and and uh uh and uh then we'll flip it to the other side now. Then I'll talk to the healthier side and say that side's really frightened and and you you really need to understand it and and not be angry about it and and uh that it it's not, you know, it's it's misguided and and and and needs needs your help. Um and um so um so how to bring out the healthy side is to be aware that there is a healthy side and and if if it works for you uh use the lateral vision. Uh so um that's um um excuse me that that actually is very powerful and and these glasses are powerful. Uh and uh and I also have an LED that I put on the forehead. It's called photobiomodulation. And uh uh I'm going to set this here so it stops rocking. Okay. Sorry. Um so um uh uh with the photobiomodulation we're doing a study for fentanyl addiction. It's a it's a a large uh NIH study for the FDA and and we're getting uh we think we're getting great results because many of the fentanyl addicts are uh doing well uh both with their dose and and and and they're feeling well and and doing well. Half of the patients get a sham treatment and half get an active treatment. And it's just a four-minute light treatment. There there aren't any uh uh side effects so far. And and I've been doing it actually for 15 years. And and uh and other people are doing it. It's a it's a burgeoning field now. It's called photobiomodulation. But I'm the only person who puts the light over the positive hemisphere. Okay. Once you use the the eye test, I determine which is the positive side. And the light is two or three times more powerful than the um glasses. But the the uh or the eye u maneuver, but the eye maneuver is easier to do. You know, you just put your hands up or put put sunglasses on. And uh so in my practice uh usually by the end of the session I give the person a light treatment and and have a a study go going on right now for depression and getting great results. Yeah. I thought I thought the infrared was very interesting because I I'm familiar with it. You know I I know in infrared sauna. I love an infrared sauna. Right. I've used infrared and other you know I know there's a lot of other ladies out there. We're trying to battle wrinkles. I've got my little infrared light I put on my face to, you know, make me look a little less old. Um, so this idea that it could also help um with my anxiety, with my PTSD, with my depression is pretty fascinating. And I wonder how much, you know, using it on a daily basis, you know, would be able to help just in overall health. Yeah, I actually use it um u almost every day, you know, and I don't have time. I don't but uh yeah, I would say that I I use it about five times a week and and I use it for cognitive enhancement. U so I'm not except when I'm choking now. Um uh uh I'm I'm not uh and I'm not really anxious now, but um um uh so I'm not really very symptomatic, but I I feel that it it gives me a a little cognitive edge, right? And um uh now, but you have to use it on on one side. So, so if you're using the sauna, you're you're you're radiating both sides and that might give some benefit, but you you're also stimulating the troubled side, right? Uh and also your trauma uh was later. In other words, it it the major trauma occurred as an adult and most and so I don't know if it's as lateralized. Most of the people I see uh have dysfunctional families and uh maybe an alcoholic father or a demeaning mother and or a bullying brother. These are the kinds of traumas that I typically see and and they're childhood traumas and they and they seem to get lodged on one side. Did you have a an effect when you tried it looking laterally or or you know I did I kept trying it a few times after we first discussed it and I and I did I tried thinking of a few different things. Um I think I felt a lot when I thought about uh my time in Afghanistan actually. Of course that's been I mean it's 20 you know 20 years on at this point but it doesn't go away but um but it did you know do something. So, uh, I, you know, it certainly made sense to me, you know, I definitely felt, so I was thinking about the time, my time in Afghanistan, like we discussed and I was looking at um, a photo of me and my husband and, you know, we served in the army together, right? And when I covered one side um, you know, everything felt, you know, scary and I started getting really anxious. Um and then the other side and I felt very happy looking at the photo of us. So it was it was stark. It was stark. Okay, that's cool. Okay, so that's a good response. Okay. Uh and um so I always take a risk if I bring it up because I say if someone doesn't respond it sounds, you know, like it's it's a failure. But so you you had a a good response and that's and you can use that. Uh so as you said, you know, if you want to pull up your mature side, you look out that side and and then if you want to talk to the traumatized side, you can uh you know uh look out the the uh the side that stimulates the negative hemisphere. And also I I want to say that we we have a study that we published from MLAN hospital at Harvard uh showing that uh just looking out one lateral visual field or the other. We had people go into an fMRI scanner with goggles that had tape on it and if you looked out one side um it it it covered one eye and you only could see out half the other eye. And then so if you look to the left uh you activated your right visual field and it lit up like a Christmas tree and not the other side was dark. Now, now uh it's not that only one side was working, but we were able to manipulate the data to exaggerate the difference between the sides and and and when we did that, which we were allowed to do because we had a hypothesis. Um uh it it was really a a f fantastic result. And when the patient looked uh to the opposite side, uh the hemisphere switched and and the other side lit up and the other and the uh same the uh same side um uh I don't want to use like ipsolateral side, right? Uh uh was was dark. it's just flipped and and um uh so it's it's a real effect just uh doing this simple maneuver of just you know covering one eye and half the other eye and and if you look out the whole cover one eye and look out one eye it's not going to work because there you're you're stimulating both hemispheres right and and that's why you have to cover uh half of u one eye and look out the lateral portion and um um uh and you know and if you're uh feeling uh distress and it might even help with physical symptoms. I a lot of times uh I'll give someone a light treatment and they'll say my chest pain went away. I didn't even know they were having chest pain. And uh and and one time uh uh and this never happened again, but it was a couple years ago. I had three people in one day who said my hip pain went away and I had them walk downstairs and walk up again and they said, "No, it feels good." You know, and uh now it didn't last and it wasn't a a cure. Uh but it was it was interesting, you know. So it it it can affect the the body because the mind is connected to the body. Yeah. Yeah. I think so many especially my listeners you know so many of us have chronic illness you know we've read all the John Earno books Dr. especially, you know, and for good and bad reasons. We have many different, you know, feelings associated with this because sometimes you go to a doctor and they say, "Well, it's all in your head." And, you know, no, it's not, doc. I have something very real. I mean, it took me four years to get my diagnosis and turns out it's not in my head at all. Um, but that being said, uh, many of us have been able to use, um, therapy or, um, you know, other means to try to help along with our pain. And I've learned from my own experiences and, you know, reading about this and trying every, you know, I've, you know, basically been at a point where I'll try anything if it might make me feel better. But the the the mind, as much as I want to say that I have this strong, you know, aversion to pain, I can get through anything. I'm chronically ill, um I actually have a very weak tolerance. Um because my mind associates anything with pain at this point. Um everything that has happened to me over the last five years. You know, some I was starting to associate running with pain because every time I tried to run, my joints and muscles seized up and I couldn't move. Uh so I've started to learn that sometimes even though it may not you know the source of my pain was not just in my head but my head associates so many things and I've been able to identify just an absurd list at this point of things that I've gone through that my mind now associates with pain and I sort of recoil like oh gosh this is going to hurt and I suddenly have a very low tolerance for pain as a result. So, um, you know, I think this this crowd, you know, my crowd, we really get it because, um, you know, yes, on one hand, it can be frustrating if a doctor tries to dismiss you and say, "It's it's in your head. It's all something well up there." But there is that connection. But see the the um the mind uh is is connected to the immune system and if you're feeling anxious uh chronically or depressed it it it it has a negative impact on on the immune system you know and and so you can get more colds you know but you also can get you know these weird uh im immune u responses you know that can affect your joints and and and uh uh so the pain is real uh and and u and there is a connection with the mind uh uh both with uh you know muscle tension can can hurt a joint but but I think most of it is through the immune system uh- which is complicated but responds to uh mental wellbeing uh or mental distress and And uh um that that there there there's a a definite connection between uh how how we feel uh how we perceive the world uh and actually and which side is dominating and the immune system. Right. And and did you notice any difference in your physical symptoms when you did that or did you not do the visual thing for a long enough time? I didn't do it for a long time. And um right now, you know, I'm in a period where um compared to, you know, how I was feeling, I'm I'm doing pretty good. Mhm. Um although you know I should definitely probably do that for a long period of time when my muscles are starting to feel really particularly tight um due to you know long list of diagnosis I have today. But um yeah I think yeah I should definitely give that one a try. Um because I have tried to you know I try I love to experiment. I'll give anything a shot. Um so I have a you know I do know that you know my mind can associate certain things with pain and it can you know at times get worse just because my mind is bringing me there like here we go again. Well, pain is is a trauma and and u um and and that's the thing about trauma that it can begin with um uh some you know childhood rejection and then school failures and then ridicule and and and then drug abuse and and and uh uh so each trauma uh adds uh you know, to the trauma and and then it can mound up and then you can have people who really failed and and they're living on the street and using fentanyl and and uh uh and that's who we're treating in our study. And uh that everybody in our study uh with a few exceptions has had three overdoses prior to coming in. Wow. Yeah. and uh um um uh that um uh not in the study but prior to the study. So we haven't had any uh um any overdoses in the study. Uh um but um um uh and and I hope you you know we get FDA approval from this study from the FDA and then we can bring it uh to the public. Absolutely. Well, I mean the numbers you were giving me when we talked about it are phenomenal. You know, no half the you assume the half that is not getting the placebo. Yeah. their um their urge to have to to um take the drug is down 90%. Yeah. Well, it's incredible. Yeah, that's the top 10%. Uh yeah. Uh they're either 100% off or or down to 90%. And and and the bottom h uh uh 10% have gotten worse by 15%. Okay, they've increased their dose 15%. And they usually drop out. And we can tell I doesn't I wouldn't say we can tell, but we hypothesize. We can with a given person, we we we we they're not doing well and we suspect they're getting sham and somebody else is doing real well and and we suspect that they're getting the active treatment. And and it's hard for us to believe that so many people would do well with a a a sham treatment, a placebo treatment, right? Dealing with fentanyl. Absolutely. And you know, talk about this this trauma that contributes to, you know, in this case, fentanyl addiction um and the pain that comes with all of that. You know, we know, you know, we're still learning a lot, but we know that many of the people who have these kinds of addictions came from trauma to get there. These are people who Yeah, they all have come from traumatic background often come Yeah. So, it makes sense. And we don't really talk about the trauma that leads to lock them up, you know. Yeah. Exactly. Lock them up. Lock them up. Yeah. Or just say no, you know, like Yeah. Just say no. Yeah. Like Mrs. Rean used to say, "Yes." Yes. Um I Well, I think now this is starting to get I mean it's been what 40 I guess it's been a while, but yes, uh we used to get those commercials all the time. I remember the egg cracking, but it it is trauma. This isn't happening to groups of people who are walking into this without trauma. And the fentanyl opioid epidemic really hit places like West Virginia hard because these people are living in trauma. Right. Right. Exactly. And uh uh and we evaluate them. We have trauma scales and so forth. They all have extensive uh trauma history. So we're not giving them therapy, psychotherapy because uh it's too hard to study it. It confounds you know, there's different therapists have different abilities and right and uh but uh the the light is easy to you know if if it works it's a it's a known quantity and and it's a different comparing it to a sham is a fair comparison. So these people are getting better without psychotherapy. If you use it in in my practice with psychotherapy it's it's much more far more efficient effective. Yeah, but we know from our scales when they come in they get u uh they're given some trauma scales and and and they've all had severe trauma which I would expect and then the fentanyl uh is a huge trauma and and they feel like failure and and they can't get off this and and and compounds so that each trauma kind of adds to the old trauma. And people forget about the old trauma. They just uh they'll say, "I'm a drug addict." And then feel really bad about themselves. And and I like to uh say I don't have any addicts in my practice. I have trauma victims uh who you know have abused drugs uh or use them destructively and we want to attend to the trauma and and the use and interestingly uh I I can give either uh the the uh uh the the glasses uh uh or or the light treatment in my practice and um and someone can have drug cravings uh on one side and and they and not have them on the other side and just flipping the glasses and and uh uh and if I give somebody a light treatment, they can come in with uh like eight out of 10 uh cr craving uh for opioids and after their treatment uh it's way either way down. Usually it's it's it's it's off and and and that's true with alcohol too and gambling, right? Yes. Both. Yeah. And it's you know it's interesting those also things associated with trauma. Yeah. And to plug my book again, I I have um it's all about this and and and how there are uh narrative fiction descriptions of therapy sessions and talk talks about the research and and and how to help yourself with it. Yeah. And you know, I think it's it's it's phenomenal. Um you know, and I encourage everybody it is you know, you can get it tomorrow um through Amazon.com. the long title being goodbye anxiety, depression, addiction, and PTSD. I thought the top was cute. It's just all crossed out. So, my brain immediately said dual brain psychology because that's the you know that was that came across so positive and cross out all that crap I keep trying to get rid of which is difficult and um you know I just think it's very whether you're dealing with a fentanyl addiction, a family member dealing with it or something else. Everybody who is dealing with chronic illness, we we have a certain level of trauma and starting this podcast going through everything I did, it's given me a very different perspective and a set of empathy, you know, this empathy that I might not have had before because I know people get to various places because they got there through trauma. Um, you know, and you you you go through so much and you start to lose trust in medical professionals because you're still sick. And also if you're starting to feel like you can't live without certain things, so you go to the next doctor like, "Oh, what's the next med I need? I think I feel something else again. It's all coming back." And next thing you know, you've got 14 prescriptions. And um you know, you feel like you can't live your life without this. And I see over and over and over again in the chronic illness community where we have our own types of addictions, but we just don't put that down on paper. You're an addict. We say you're chronically ill and you have your bag os. There's even cute little funny bags out there you can order that you know your bag of drugs but you you have to really ask yourself what am I doing here? Am I dealing am I not dealing with trauma in a positive way? Yeah. And I prescribe very few drugs because I I I feel that most of them don't work and and um and and I I have to say that that this work is very effective that people get better and and uh uh and I think just even using it that with when you know from the book or blocking your eyes you know that that if you uh if you can get the concept that that that there's a person inside who's hurting and it's sort of like the inner child, but I don't like the term inner child because it's been, you know, bannered around and and trivialized. But there actually is an inner child uh in there uh who uh knows that the trauma is going to recur and and and often repeats the trauma to to have a sense of control. Yes. And um and but I I think it's really u helpful to have this concept of two minds and and uh and and rather than uh I'm suffering from trauma. Uh there's a part of me that's suffering from trauma and there's a part of me that's healthy and and I I think it's a better perspective and a more realistic perspective. Yes. because it's so easy to just see the trauma in ourselves, to see the hurt, to see the brokenness. I am a broken I've said that a million times. I feel like over the last five years, I'm a broken person. Um but there there is a healthy side to me. Yeah. You know, you just have to absolutely work towards that healthy side and understand that the broken side is there, you know, and I get better each and every day. Um so thinking of it that way, I think is so important. I still remember right after they finally diagnosed me with drug induced lupus, every new drug they put me on, you know, if I go out for a run or try to do something and everything started hurting, I'd call my doctor. It's happening again. It's a drug induced lupus. And if you Google drug induced lupus and your drug, you know, now everybody's afraid to take medication. There's a decent chance that your your medication is associated with it. But I thought every single med I took like here it is. It's happening. I know it is. I know it is. I you know, but I just could not get through the trauma of it. But obviously there was a side of me that was doing better because I was still living life. I was still picking myself up and going outside. So I like that perspective and I'm really excited to hear about the infrared study when it's completed in the FDA approval. Now we have we have a a completed study that's published uh where uh we treated Okay. So that one's already the fentanel study's already completed. No. Uh the fentanyl study um we're my site we have two sites uh okay where we're doing it uh and and at the end of this month my site will be completed and MLAN hospital is doing another site and they'll finish uh probably in October. Okay. And uh um but we have a phase one study where we uh treated 40 subjects, half of whom got sham and half active and there was a we measured um u was focused on cravings and and it was heroin not fentanyl. It was before fentanyl. Uh okay. It was in I think we finished it in 2021 and and um uh and there was a huge difference between the activives treatment and the sham treatment for craving and also for those who were using there was a gigantic difference. uh that that uh they were um uh either most had come off of of uh the heroin uh who were who got the active treatment and and uh and the sham treatment didn't. So, and that that study is published um in 2021. And I have a a website um it's um called dualbrain psychology.com and and uh and there are papers that have links to them. So, so this is a study that we published in um I I was either 2021 or 2022 and I'll have your website in the uh show notes as well so everybody can go there because it's it's fascinating work and um you know there's just so much more we have to learn about the brain and how it affects us and you know um how and very few people think about the hemispheres in other words Uh I I think I'm the only researcher who actively, you know, considers uh that the hemisphere is the most important brain area. Everybody's looking at the amygdala and the hippocampus. And there actually two amygdali. There's one in the left brain and one in the right brain. And that's true for all of these uh parts of the brain. Uh but I think when you put them all together in a hemisphere you can actually sorry about this uh you can actually put um half the brain to sleep and neurosurgeons do that as uh before surgery as a test right and u and the person can uh communicate uh when half the brain is asleep. Interesting. Yeah. Huh. That says something. Um well, you know, I love the studies. Um I'll look, you know, I'm looking forward to your next book to tell me more about that because now I want to know about that. Um it's just so fascinating and I think that for many of for many of us um you know we'll we'll keep learning more about why we um experience pain and trauma the way we do the more that we understand our minds and how to treat it. So um you know that's really fascinating um to learn about. So uh I'm excited. Um I'll be keeping a lookout for the infrared at the FDA. Hopefully it's not caught in some foregone know where where the government has gone. Yeah, it's off. We know where it's going, but but portal. We don't know what's left. Yeah. Yeah. We have no idea, but I'll keep looking for it. And if they got rid of the department, you know, maybe we can put together a proposal to see if we can't come in and take over and finish that stuff up or something. They gota they got to finish that. Somebody has to do this work. We need help. Well, well, we're going to finish the study. Um, and um, and even if we stopped at this point, we'd have enough data. Uh, but uh, but we have to get FDA approval to bring it to market. Yep. Because it's a medical device. Yeah, absolutely. Well, thank you so much for coming on. This has been a great conversation. And everybody, don't forget to order your new book, uh, Goodbye Anxiety, Depression, Addiction, and PTSD: Dualbrain Psychology, available on Amazon.com. So, thank you for being here, Dr. Frederick Schiffers. It was a great conversation. Thanks so much. Thanks. Good. That's a wrap for this episode of Living Chronic. I hope today's conversation gave you insight, inspiration, or at least a little reassurance that you're not alone on this journey. Living with a chronic illness or disability comes with its challenges, but it also comes with strength, resilience, and a community that understands. If you enjoyed today's episode, be sure to subscribe, leave a review, and share it with someone who might need to hear it. You could follow me on Instagram at chronicallybrandysh other socials at brandysh or my website at brandysh.com for more discussions, advocacy updates, and everyday strategies for thriving with a chronic illness. And if you have a topic you'd like to hear about, send me a message. I'd love to hear from you. Until next time, keep pushing forward, keep advocating for yourself, and remember, you are more than your diagnosis. You are powerful. You are unstoppable. Thanks for listening to Living Chronic. See you next time.
today we are honored to to announce Dr Frederick Schiffer he is a research associate at McLean and a part-time assistant clinical professor in Psychiatry at the Harvard Medical School Dr shiffer has been studying the relationship between cerebral laterality and psychological States since 1990 his hypothesis is that each hemisphere is capable of manifesting separate personalities one side more troubled by past traumas than the other side he also studies how near infrared light applied to the forehead may act as a treatment for psychological problems and including opioid use disorders and he has a private practice um in psychiatry in Newton Massachusetts and you may know he Dr shiver is a prolific writer you may have heard of his his first book of two minds the Revolutionary science of dual brain psychology and his newest book comes out this October called goodbye anxiety depression addiction and PTSD you can find it on that website dual brain psychology.com and these are just a few examples of his work he also has many other articles in reputable journals as well as a number of abstracts so clearly his contributions are influential to the field he also has a webinar coming up at the end of the month September 30th and you can also find it on this website and and with that I am going to stop sharing and hand it over to Dr Schaffer well thank you and and it's a pleasure to be here and and I'm glad that you're interested in learning a little bit about dual brain psychology so I I know that your main interests are in photobiomodulation which is an interest of mine but in order to explain what I'm doing with photobiomodulation I have to explain do brain psychology which is a a novel theory of psychology and it's the first psychological theory that I know of that comes out of rigorous science and that is supported by Publications mostly from Harvard that rigorously test the hypothesis with high-tech things like evoke potentials and fi and anatomical M and and we also have clinical studies that we conduct and we're conducting one now for the National Institute for drug abuse and they wanted us to try to treat a mild and moderate opioid use and what we found was that it doesn't exist and that everybody that we're coming across is addicted to fentanyl so it's become a fentanyl addiction study and it's been a challenge to enroll people but we seem to be getting very good results that the majority of people are pretty dramatically reducing their fentanyl use one patient who finished recently said he was going to die as s and come back as another candidate but I don't have the results from that half for getting sham and half for getting active it's an FDA study as well and and it would be the first device to get FDA approval if we wind up getting that FDA has given us a breakthrough designation and has determined that our method and device I have no significant risk so what I want to do is talk about dual brain psychology so that I can explain what I'm doing with photobiomodulation I'm not using neuro feedback I've taken courses in it and bought the equipment and so forth but I never really got into it so I'm not criticizing it I think that it helps a lot of people but I'm not expert at it and I'm not going to really talk about it if somebody has some questions we can discuss it but so it's going to be primarily about photobiomodulation but based on uh this psychological theory so dual brain psychology has a few premises one is that trauma is the cause of perhaps all psychiatric illnesses and U maybe not but all that I'm familiar with and have seen I Define trauma differently in other words I think trauma is anything that harms us or or hurts us or makes us feel insecure and interferes with our functioning so it could be but it doesn't have to be a rape or molestation or a beating or combat which which certainly are traumas but I think that in in human life we can be traumatized by a critical parent or rejecting parent or a sibling who's bullying or peers who were ridiculing so these are things things that I think are traumas of course we talk about complex trauma but I think even that's a little more complicated than than what I'm talking about and then what happens is say I have a rejecting mother I have a lot of men whose mother said when the kid was three or four years old you're a loser and you'll never amount to anything and so when he gets to school he's already feeling insecure and so he can't pay attention and he's attention deficit disorder and and the teacher is upset with him and he doesn't get good grades and then he's more insecure and and he keeps rolling until he gets in with a bad crowd and starts using alcohol and then it becomes a a question of well who's responsible for his alcoholism who opened the beer can well he did okay and so all of the trauma is forgotten hi I'm Fred I'm an alcoholic and it ends there it's it's my responsibility ility and now I have a disease and my disease is incurable and I can go into remission but I I never get better and that's a trauma the one trauma leads to further traumas and then if I can't work because of my alcoholism or my drug abuse or my rage then that becomes another trauma and the trauma keeps rolling on itself and becoming a problem now one thing that I discovered that I'm going to talk about is that the trauma seems to get larged more in one brain Hemisphere and what I'm going to talk about is that each brain hemisphere can support a different mind in normal people this comes out of the split brain studies the troubled side can be either the left brain or the right brain so there is a a common uh feeling that all the bad stuff is in the right brain but with a lot of people particularly people with a lot of trauma their left brain is holding more of the trauma and with the the affected brain is an effective mind so the person has two minds and that's the title of my first book of two minds so if we stimulate one mind what one hemisphere we get a personality change it's subtle person has the same address and the same name but they see me as critical like their mother was and on the other side I look empathic and in some people it's quite dramatic as I'll talk about so these are just a bunch of Publications just to show that you know this is been well tested and this is only as as many as I could fit on the page so I was noticing in my practice I was trained at mlan and at that time it was a Bastion of psychoanalysis and in the 80s one by one each unit became a biological unit and then by the early 90s we had an attending staff at mlan where I was one of the attending psychiatrists and I had a private practice there and we'd get referrals from the different halls and I see the patient four times a week and Blue Cross would pay for two months and by the 90s blue Frost was cutting down and mlan decided they would save money by getting rid of the attending staff and hiring cheap labor pay paying for $40 an hour and charging $400 or something and and keeping the change and I had already started doing research so I stayed on at mlan as a researcher but I was no longer a clinician and they even tore down the building that we're in we were in this beautiful building and today it's a heap uh of debris and they didn't even make a parking lot out of it I don't know why but but so uh today there's no talking with patients so you go if a patient goes in he's in for a week he he gets medicated and he gets told that he's bipolar which is not a nice thing to be told and he's discharge or sent to a halfway house and the way Psychiatry is practice around the world today so I think that Psychiatry has lost its mind and I'm trying to find our mind again I'm sure that that you've noticed that yourselves so I was steeped in Freudian psychology but I wasn't seeing IDs or egos or super egos easily in my practice even though I I knew what they were but what I was seeing was that the patient would come in and he had kind of a very regressed personality and as he got better he became sort of a mature normal person and then something would happen and he'd become regressed and then he was back to this regress personality and the regress personality had a lot of the uh attributes of the ID who was had primitive thinking and and immature behaviors so instead of having the the ego writing the ID it was really I was seeing like a shift in personality and then I started reading the split brain studies again I had read them in college and thought they were really fascinating but I didn't really understand them uh and that the the thing that you have to understand about these footb brain studies and let me explain about so here's the in the ego found that clinically they I was having problems with it and so this is a paradigm shift and so the S brain studies were done actually first in the 1940s and then in the 1960s and Roger spurry won the Nobel Prize for these studies and essentially they had patients who had intractable epilepsy and couldn't function because of their epilepsy it was you know happening multiple times a day and so they decided to cut the Corpus colossum so the Corpus colossum is in the center here and so when they did that an very interesting thing happened there were really two personalities that became quite distinct and so here's Roger Sperry and and Joe Bogan was the neurosurgeon and Iran zidel was a graduate student who worked with Sperry and so the idea here is that so this should be cut here in this illustration so this is the the connection between the left brain and the right brain and if you show something to the left visual field it hits the medial retina the retina is divided so that the lateral portion goes straight back goes ifs the lateral and the medial portion crosses over to the opposite brain so that this picture here shown to the left visual field is only seen by the right right brain and and what that means is that uh if the right brain controls the left side of the body and it controls the left arm and hand and it can reach into the box and very easily pick out the chest piece from about five items that are in the box if you put the Box on the right side and the right arm and hand are controlled by the left brain it has no idea what to pick out that that only the right brain saw the picture and spurry showed a photograph to a woman that he had been studying and she started giggling and so the left brain can speak and she said you've got a funny machine doctor which was a confabulation she had no idea why she was gigant and spur showed a Playboy nude in the 1960s to her right brain her left brain which could speak her right brain is mute you can give hand signals but it's mute so she's giggling but the speaking left brain has no idea why she's giggling so there really are two minds here and they're both intelligent they both speak English and they understand what Spur's asking them to do and and you can show political pictures uh political figures and they can give a thumbs up or thumbs down on both sides or or the left side can identify who it is and give an opinion so the left side is like talking to an an ordinary person and and the right side can give hand signals and and the hand signals often differ so and then there's a post chomy chomy is the name of the surgery where you cut the Corpus kosom that connects the two hemispheres and and after that the two hands can fight over a sandwich one hand wants e tuna fish and the other hand once a cheese sandwich and these things are in the literature one woman is buttoning a dress to put one and the other hand is unbuttoning it and another guy wants to smoke a cigarette and his left hand connected to his right brain keeps putting it and that goes away after a while as the left brain takes over and dominates so one of the paradigms that's SP used was to put two words on screen and so the word tooth goes only to the right brain because of the retina and so the left hand can reach back and pick out the tooth and the left brain can say the word brush so I did a study with Bogan and zidel which was the last split brain study in the California series Sperry had died a couple years earlier and this was the the first psychological inventory of the two hemispheres and so what I I did was I put a word on each side of the screen like spurry had done but M were wor about the question that I asked was how much do you feel one side so happy and the other dishonest and so there were positive and negative words and both sides got all the words but in in different orders and and then they responded with each hand pointing to pegs and we had graduate students watching the hands and and marking the results and one of the subjects who who was he's been in many swi brain studies it turned out that his right brain had a higher opinion of himself than his left brain and this was statistically significant and and the other gentleman has scored similarly in both hemispheres but when we were setting up he he mentioned that he'd been bullied as a child and I know that bullying is a severe trauma and I asked him if he was upset by the bullying and he said no of course not it happened so long ago you know he was around 50 years old now and so when we did the study uh I put in about 10 different questions about the bullying how upset he was about the bullying and as he told me his his right hand signing for his left brain indicated that he was not upset by the bullies but his left hand signing for his mute right brain was extremely upset by the bullies on all the the questions that I had asked and we when we published it we wrote that it was our opinion that the right brain was upset by The Bullying whereas the right brain wasn't now this is a picture of wner whitling who is a German scientist who somehow I Came Upon a paper that he had written and he had a very elaborate machine which I think must have cost a million dollars and it tracked eye movements and blocked a computer screen and the purpose of it was to show a movie in free Vision to one Hemisphere or the other and essentially after I read the protocol by five times I figured out that he was showing the uh movie to one lateral visual field or the other and I didn't have the budget for that so I figured I could do the same thing by going like this and so I'm looking at my left lateral visual field and or my right lateral visual field and and I should be able to do the same thing that the whitling is doing so I didn't respond when I went like that so like this years later I did went to the office and and tried it I had a my first patient that day was a Vietnam vet who had severe PTSD and he was doing very well and I asked him to do it and he got all upset he's looking out his right visual field which is stimulating his left brain and he says that plant behind you looks like the jungle and he had four tours of Duty in in Vietnam and a purple heart and and he's obviously having a flashback so I said well look out the other side and he smiles he says no it's a nice looking plant and and and I knew that I was in business that day I had a bunch of people who had intense responses like that about 55% of people respond intensely like this so it's not an unusual it's not like a rare event where someone responds intensely and I had an experience that I describ in my book where I was on vacation in Italy and had had a a very intense response so here I am I'm using my hands to block vision and then later we we Advanced science advances and we had goggles that had tape on them and and this shows how it affects the the retina and so something to this field is going to stimulate the right brain and so what I see is if I ask someone to to get uh some junk mail like this and have them block their Vision that I'll look different on one side than the other and the the side that's negative is a trait for the individual and uh but it so it could be either the left side or the right side that's more more holding more the trauma and at the so on one side I might look very critical and they'll have drug Cravings or alcohol cravings or gambling Cravings or anxiety or depression but whatever their symptoms are and on the other side there's a big change there's a big drop in in their cravings and I look more friendly and helpful and they like themselves better so that they're the same person but there's a a very important change that seems to relate to their traumas so here here's a a picture there's a a really tough guy on on the right side there uh I wouldn't you know mess with him but the other guy looks a lot friendlier and so the idea is that each hemisphere has a mind and Neuroscience over the last four decades with trillions of dollars has looked for measles in the brain and and and fmis or you know come up with measles we say well the the left major was active when we did this and and we don't we don't really know what that means but I'm saying that the important structure is the hemisphere with all its different components and and the hemisphere can support a a somewhat different this is an e marai study that we did at mlan published and and so the instructions were look to the left for 30 seconds and look to the right for 30 seconds and the opp the controlateral hemisphere became active depending on which side they were looking at and so they're very simple instructions and we didn't see anything in in the individual epiz except in the visual area there were seven individuals and when you looked at all you crunched all the data you got an image like this so this is a a guy who I won't read through this but after I was seeing that I was getting these interesting responses he I had treated him well for a cocaine addiction and he came back and what we found when when I treated him was that his father was a demeaning to toward him and so when he looked out one side he he he could feel the pain of his father's rejections and out the other side his father didn't bother him he said I could handle him today and um so I had him look out the the negative side again I said would you use he said well you know with these glasses on yeah I could see myself using and and when I put him on the other side he said no I I wouldn't use on this side what would somebody have to do to make you use on this side they have to do some extreme things and so if you want to try this at home where you are now you can do results are kind of immediate so if you block one eye and the middle of your other eye and what a lot of people do is they look out the whole eye and you have to look out half the eye to get the lateral visual field to to be able to cross over what you have to do is give it a minute give it about the 60 seconds and I want you to think of something upsetting and see from zero to 10 how much distress you feel on one side versus the other and again not not the whole eye but half the eye like that okay and and I use this in Psychotherapy it's very easy I have person look out one side or the other and I can talk to the troubled side and the idea of of I call dual brain Psychotherapy is to talk to the troubl side and try and educate it about its trauma and get the healthy side to be a co-therapist and I find it's a very effective treatment this is a study that we did at mclan this is just an MRI study and we found that people who had a a a positive left hemisphere had a larger nucleus cumbent in their left brain and that's the reward center they had a smaller igula and a larger a campus uh in the left side and they also had there's an interesting finding here where they had the green button here is the amydala and the left amydala this is where the people had a left positive Hemisphere and these are frontal lobe areas that suppress the amygdala and they're absent these are tracks this is a DTI study and so the suppression from the frontal lobe is missing at least in in this study and so because we weren't sure which it varied which side was positive we did a study to predict who would respond to TMS our TMS is always given to the left side and uh no one knows why it's always given to the left side um it's just that there's a sort of common wisdom that the left is always good and the right's bad and and but what what we found was that people who had more dist grass in their left brain did poorly that's if if it's high up here they had a uh less this is a a decrease of 10% so they didn't even reach 10% most of them and and they their average was about 7% decrease in their Hamilton scores after a twoe course of TMS those who had a positive left hemisphere just with the the the visual test scored better all the people who did well except for one left-handed woman were predicted to do well by the visual and then we replicated that in a in another study and then I became interested in because I was looking at rtms and I I I didn't want to Lug the heavy machine up three flights to my office so I I got interested in photobiomodulation and the only thing I really knew I was doing some near infrared spectroscopy which uses neared light to me to measure blood flow and sual oxygenation and so I wondered if near Fred light might get into the brain and stimulate the hemisphere so that's where I was coming from didn't have really much technical now I read a number of papers but I was not at all an expert in photobiomodulation so I called the Wellman Center at MGH and it was a old call and I got passed around to a bunch of people and I asked if it would be dangerous and they said well if it doesn't hurt the skin it won't hurt the brain because it you know decreases in intensity whe the square of the distance was really that interested finally there was a guy got Pastor named Mike and Mike seemed quite interested and we want up doing a study and the study is is probably my most cited paper what we did was I I brought in it was a pilot study I had 10 subjects most of them had a history but not active substance abuse and they had depression and and and our main outcome was the Hamilton depression score and after a single treatment by the way let me go back to Mike Mike turns out to be Michael Hamlin who's probably the most famous photobiomodulation person and so he he did veloped the parameters for the light and you know guided me with the safety and so we have a light it's at 810 nanometers and has 240 mows of power and 4minute treatment we were using the ansy standards for safety and the results that we got two weeks later uh our outcome was Hamilton at Baseline and then Hamilton two weeks later and then four weeks later it was about a 40% drop in the Hamilton at two weeks and then it went uh back up to there was like a a 20% drop at four weeks the one uh treatment uh in in these 10 people had some profound effects and then we treated both sides because I I had to get through the IRB at MGH and I felt that I started talking about dual brain psychology I was going to wind up in a a swamp and and so we just treated both sides which is what most people do in in the field and but I wanted to in my practice I got an IRB involved and I was using the LED that we had developed to treat the positive hemisphere we used a continuous light to to simulate the positive hemisphere the point here is that it was the same responses we got with the visual thing except that it was about two or three times more powerful one guy I mentioned the Brooke came in he was came in for alcoholism and I asked him if if he had any cravings and he said he did and and I said well you know I have a beer in my refrigerator and we had an auction and he was willing to give me $500 and and I gave him a a 4minute leg treatment over his positive Hemisphere and the the the way we determine which hemisphere is positive is is using the visual test and I have other means of of pushing that um if if a person isn't showing much of a difference but let's say that that the person re responded and and most of these people will have more Cravings on one side than the other side and uh anyway I gave him a four minute light treatment and he didn't want the beer of my refrigerator and he didn't want to pay $4 or $500 for it and I said well I'll give it to you and he wouldn't take it and this is not uncommon there's a patient who I'm treating now and he'll come in and he'll be depressed he did well in the last session but by the time he comes in a week later he's depressed again and so he might have a depression score on a Beck depression scale of um 34 this is a paper I'm just submitting for publication and after a like treatment in this one instance it went down to four that I remember but whenever I treat him he has a dramatic Improvement in his depression now it doesn't last he really should get treated twice a week and I only I see him once a week and he gets treated when he comes in for his therapy session and I'm trying to show him that he has the potential to be healthy he's been living all his life in a depression and we Trace that back to a severe abuse by his father and how that abuse was rolling and created other abuses and so it's been a fight uh for about 3 months he's still in treatment but he's hanging in there and I think he's going to do well I can't say he's doing you know he's sort of with the program but he's not quite there yet the the the negative side is very strong and it's been dominating for years and it doesn't want to retire it doesn't want to go in on disability uh these are the results of a craving study that uh I got a um a grant from naida and and we studied half at mlan and and half at a company that I started called mlight and we both got the same results both at mlan and at my might and we studied 40 individuals half got sham and half got active treatment and what we were looking for what were craving say were opioid addicts who weren't used using except for out of 40 10 were using and there was a big difference in the outcomes favoring the active treatment over sham had an effect size of 1.5 which an effect size of 08 is considered high so it's really twice high and it's a a very good effect size Prozac has an effect size of about3 which is quite low and it remains very popular today so from this we got a phase 2 Grant from naida and and the FDA gave us a breakthrough designation to study mild and moderate opioid abuse and what we found was that there isn't any mild and moderate opioid abuse anymore that we've gotten rid of oxy nobody can prescribe it anymore for pain so people with pain aren't getting treated and uh so everybody's turned to fentanyl so everybody is there's a vast epidemic I I think throughout the world but certainly in the United States and in Boston the fentanyl addiction is a blizzard and and and we're in the middle of our treatment study and at our site we've had about 60% of the people dramatically drop their fentol use and I think that people have dropped out that's why it's 60% I think the number of the Sham people dropped out of course I don't don't know that I'm blind to who's getting sham or active but and probably it won't be till next August when we complete the study that we'll be able to unblind the study in the in the first study where we saw the decrease in Cravings we also had a big decrease in use and it turned out that the decrease in use was dramatic at mlan but at at mlight it was like a flat line it really wasn't much a difference and the FDA was interested in that and so I went back after we had published our papers published in Frontiers either in Psychiatry or psychology I don't remember which and I looked at the people who were using the 10 people and five of them were treated at mlan and five were treated at mlight and at mlan just by chance by randomization four out of five got active treatment and the one who got shamed dropped out his using wasn't recorded and whereas at mlight four out of five got sham and the one who got the active treatment actually did very well he was a heavy heroin addict who by the end of the treatment wasn't using and his girlfriend was in the Sham group and and she was trying to get him to use and was using a lot and so hopefully we'll have good results with fentanyl and when we started to see that oh my God we're treating Fentanyl and we weren't prepared for it and we would have designed the study differently we were treating twice a week for six weeks and then once a week for 19 weeks and that was to save Manpower but they really need to be treated at least twice a week and then we would have really gotten a much better result than than we will get uh when we're done in the present study um so this is in the first study this is just showing that there was a decrease in positive urines favoring the active treatment and in an earlier study that I had published I just want to show that The Hamiltons were decreased from uh 15 which is just a a borderline depression down to eight uh and this is the anxiety Hamilton anxiety scale went down to um so this is about nine and this is about eight here and Cravings this is with a a single treatment went down 51% versus can't read that but but it's a smaller amount in the placebo group so so one treatment they got either active or Placebo came back the next week and got the ACT got the opposite treatment and then a third week they got an evaluation and we found that effect came a week later that we didn't see an immediate effect but in a in a recent study that I'm publishing Now using the backck depression scale before and after unilateral light treatment that we saw a very powerful effect over sham with with our treatment this is the Beck depression score this is some months ago so there was in the active group there was a 40% difference versus 16% in the Sham but that's this is incomplete data it's a more complicated study than this so dual brain Psychotherapy I sort of mentioned is trying to really work with the traumatized to really deal with the trauma in one brain Hemisphere and it's complicated because that hemisphere that is kind of determined to repeat the trauma and do all the things that Freud talked about with that repetition convulsion but I find that in the majority of people it is successful and that I've had people with a profound depression that get recovered in than six months which I had never been able to do before this is my first book and cantis per who discovered the opioid receptor said that I rivaled Freud and then I later found out that she was talking about sigman's brother Ludwig Freud the Baker and so I was disappointed with that and Joe Bogan who I was very friendly with before he died I said this is wonderfully readable and well informed it's the best book ever on the social and psychiatric implications of the Supreme research so that's available on Amazon and then October 15th we hope to have this second book out which has research over the last 25 years which are included in the first study and it's an easier read the F the first book I think put people off because it seemed too Technical and so this is to be a kind of a friendlier book and then these are sunglasses uh that we use uh in the treatment and you can put them on and you can elicit one side or the other instead of using an envelope the person can continue to see you but they get that effect and then we're developing stress reduction glasses so we don't have to do it through the FDA and so Patricia has a open query yes do you and Dr Sher do you keep the glasses on doing your during your treatment or do you just do that as identification well both I I can usually I I just use them to talk with one side or the other and then we take them off but they take they have them at home and I think I would say 95% of my practice has them at home and loves them and so one one guy's an investor and and he has to wear his glasses to C himself down so he can invest wow they're they're actually in my experience quite powerful and here's the talk I'm giving on the 30th and you don't have to be a clinician if you're a clinician you can get CE but if you're not a clinician you can still come but you won't get cus that's it any I just wanted to ask one more thing do you do do are these people who have uh the photobiomodulation equipment at home as well I generally didn't because it's not approved so everything that I do is under IRB supervision is not yet approved FDA approv it's not FDA approved we have no medical device license there's right now in the United States no FDA approved we're applying for FDA approval with this fentanyl study uh but it would be limited to fental treatment if we get approved but we're still doing the study mcan's having trouble enrolling people and so we're working hard and hopefully we'll have great results a year from now and and we'll get FDA approval to treat fentanyl addiction and then we'll we'll have to do another multi-million dollar study that FDA approval for depression and other indications it's a difficult system I mean you know it costs a fortune and takes forever and so FDA approval is very difficult all of the the work that I'm talking about has been done under uh IRB supervision as a a study so but u i i did give one patient who is a physician a light to take home and she uses it at home and and finds it very helpful and I had three patients who were suffering a psychosis and and I I gave each of them a light to take home and initially I got great results and they were like transformed and then it failed and I think the negative side took over and I I think if they were in a hospital setting and getting treated every day or you know a couple times a week they they probably would have a good outcome so I took back all the lights for The Psychotic patients I felt that it in the end was not not helpful I don't think it it was harmful but I I I I didn't want to have devices that were not approved you know floating out in the community so I I have given some at home and just and the the physician is out on disability I'm trying very hard because she's a very important phys and I'm trying to get her back to work and I think we'll succeed with that and but I I sort of broke the rules to try and help her I I really wanted to thank you for your first book um I read that book and I've been a long time you're a feedback provider and and I actually appreciated the technical detail that was in the book but I start I made goggles for people to use while they were doing neura feedback hope to be able to do a a full study with it but in clinical practice it it makes it kind of difficult to do that but one of the things that that it that I certainly observed was it really sped up the response to the mirror feedback it had I thought it had great application I appreciate that I have an idea that if you if you took my light which is a single light and placed it over uh the area that you're trying to increase say beta frequency or or you could pulse it at a slower frequency you probably could augment neuro feedback with biomodulation has anybody done neuromodulation with neuro feedback together at the same time I do them sequentially I do them back toback in like within PBM and then Nur back back to back for what it's worth yeah I think Dr Ros here in in Sarasota does that I think I sequentially I've just got two quick questions if that's all right the first question is you using your studies one side of the brain of PBM application I just wanted to know what your thoughts would be on if you use PBM on the other side as well as the the left hemisphere so you use PBM for both hemispheres would that or in your opinion how would that impact results if at all uh well I think my feeling is that you'd be activating a negative Hemisphere and so you'd be sabotaging yourself but there's a study that I looked at the two sides versus I have a novel device and whether see a a huge difference with the single light with the novel device there was a big difference between bilateral and unilateral and the novel device tries to inhibit the negative Hemisphere and so that so that was off the chart better but the results showed that there was a better performance with the single light than bilateral but it wasn't statistically significant and and the study is is sloppy in that was under IRB supervision but it was it with patience in my practice it was a single blind study and U patients came in you know when they had an appointment and and sometimes they would say I don't want to be I don't want to show the forms that I am and so it had a lot of defects with it I'm submitting it because the Army is applying for a big Grant and for depression and they want to get more provisional data and that's why we did the pilot study so it's clearly marked as a pilot study with a number of defects in it and it's not you know like our our FDA study you know have we have a study monitor who is like a hawk and and and you know if we don't you know somebody takes an aspirin it's an adverse event and you know we have to report that thank you I just have another question it's it's more along the conceptualization of Jill Brin psychology in your opinion how would you say you know when you look at both hemispheres that's that's correct but what about the brain stem how do you think that plays a part in the jel brain hemisphere I don't think it does I don't know that you know you know I I only know what I see you know what I studyed and and it's very hard to study the the brain Stone but I I I I think that the the real action is in all of the computations that go on in making brain information in in the two hemispheres and that there is different brain information in the Left Brain from the right brain and so I think the brain stone is more related toess and and bodily control and that's my opinion Carl Anderson is very excited about the cerebellum and feels that that's very important I don't have an opinion about that thank you thank you okay well you're welcome I enjoyed it immensely and I hope that you come to the Symposium where where it will be it's a longer meeting and so we'll get into really the you know the Psychotherapy piece and that treatment okay thank you thank you everyone but
what's really going on in the left and the right side of our brains and how does this thing work I wasn't seeing a lot of IDs and Egos and super egos in my patients but what I was seeing was two different personalities so the person who's talking is in the left brain speech is in the left brain normally when we associate the left and right brain right for example if I am looking to increase my logic and analytical thinking which is governed by my left brain should I cover my left eye and look through the right so it has an opposite response in the brain people are more symptomatic on one side and less symptomatic on the other the emotional side of the brain like flares up or has more activity when you are a bit sleep deprived and your brain is confused on what's going on for the everyday person could that also trigger some sort of a negative experience external events can influence either side all of a sudden the depression anxiety go away and they're business they're all business and and they attend to the problem welcome back to another episode of the shift with CJ podcast where we dive deep into biohacking and psychology neuroscience and these transformative ideas that can actually help you shift your perspective and elevate your life today I am super excited because we have someone whose research has been doing like groundbreaking stuff on how we see the world trauma brain health and so much more our guest on the show today is Dr Frederick Schiffer he is a best-selling author psychologist psychiatrist uh professor at the Harvard Medical School um Dr Schiffer is amazing because he's pioneered what he calls dual brain psychology it's in a way it's a new way of understanding how trauma affects anxiety or how trauma anxiety depression um and all of these things are in two hemispheres of our brain now I will let him explain that even further so without Much Ado please welcome Dr shiffer Dr shiffer how are you today good pleasure to be here thank you for joining us all the way from Boston it's really early for you yeah okay so Dr shipper let's get right into it all your work or most of your work and you the way you're talking about this dual brain psych uh psychology can you explain to us a what does that mean like what's really going on in the left and the right side of our brains and um how does this thing work okay uh so uh it began with early in my career as a psychiatrist I was uh trained at Harvard and uh uh and in psychoanalysis and and uh uh and uh I wasn't seeing a lot of IDs and Egos and super egos in my patients but what I was seeing was two different personalities that when they came in they were sort of id-like they were conscious the ID is supposed to be unconscious and these were conscious people who were immature and impulsive and symptomatic and uh uh and as they got better they became more uh EG likee they more mature wiser healthier and uh then they' regress again and they be back to this immature State and uh uh I didn't quite know what to do with that but I just observed that and then I I was on vacation in England and I was rereading a book about the split brain studies and um and uh and I didn't understand this when I was in college and read them that that the real importance of the split brain studies which are uh studies that took place in in 1940 and then in the 1960s uh in which uh uh people with intractable epilepsy epilepsy that was uh intolerable and uh ruining their lives they couldn't drive they couldn't function couldn't work and uh so uh they did a radical surgery where they cut the connection between the left brain and the right brain and uh and and what they found was that they created two minds they were like two different people and uh I went out to California and did the last split brain study uh and uh this was in in the 1990s and uh and what I did was the first psychological inventory of the two brain hemispheres and and uh I asked uh uh question questions uh of the psychological nature of the two hemispheres and the way I did that that um uh it's known that the eyes are connected to the brain U such that the lateral visual field uh is connected to the opposite brain it it uh uh hits the the light comes in uh say if I show here to the um u u uh uh right uh the left lateral visual field uh it goes U uh if I'm a split brain patient it's only seen by my right brain my right brain is mute uh and so the person who's talking is in the left brain speech is in the left brain so the person says I I can't say it but the U uh individual can take his left hand which is controlled by his right brain and reach into a box and and and pull out the item so say it's a chest piece he and he easily reaches in the box and and pulls out the chest piece if you ask the the um uh left brain to do it with his right hand uh he can't he doesn't know what piece to pick out and and so I put two words on each side of the screen and uh one word might be happy and the other might be dishonest and there were positive and negative words and and we rotated them so that each side got all the words and and what we found was that in this one individual his right brain had a high opinion of himself and he scored high on positive words and low on negative words his his left brain had a low opinion of himself and and um uh scored low on uh positive words and and higher on negative words and and uh and then there was another patient who scored similarly and and the way they scored was the uh there were uh pegs and they used their fingers on each hand and we had graduate students watched their fingers and they pointed to pegs meaning none to extreme and that was the way they answered the questions so the question might be how much do you feel happy or uh how much do you feel uh dishonest and they would answer with their fingers and uh so the the second patient uh scored similarly on both sides but when we were setting up the equipment uh I was talking with him and and asked him about his past and and he said he had been bullied as a child and I said does it bother you he said no it happened so long ago and uh and his right hand which is signing for his left brain which is talking to me um uh indicated that he was not upset by the bullies he answered none for all the I I've inserted about 10 bully questions and but his left hand signing for his right brain indicated that he was extremely upset by the bullies and we published the article and we felt that uh uh that his right brain uh was still upset by the bullies and this is what I see in my practice that old traumas uh like old Soldiers uh Arthur said that they don't die they just fade away and uh uh that old traumas tend to stick around uh without the person being aware of it and uh and that's a lot of what my work is about and uh so uh uh I later discovered a German group that was reporting to show mov these to one brain uh hemisphere the left or right brain um in normal people uh people who had an intact connection between their left and right brain and uh and he was getting different emotional responses and and all the bad responses were not in the right brain where I expected them to be they they were uh mixed and um and and so I decided that he had a million doll machine that track eye movements a massive computer screen and and I didn't understand till I read it about five times what he was doing and I realized he was showing uh the uh movie it was a movie of somebody getting shock treatment so it was a very upsetting movie and uh and uh he was showing it to one lateral visual field with the other and so he was doing what Roger sper who won the no priz did in splp brain patients he showed um images to one lateral visual field or the other and uh so I decided to put my hands up like this and um uh and I I thought I could do the same thing and I then looked over here and I didn't feel any different uh uh but I went to the office of my first patient that day was a a Vietnam veteran who had PTSD who was doing uh much better and I asked him to hold his hands up and he's looking at his um uh left visual field which is stimulating his right brain uh and and he says that plant behind you looks like the jungle so he's he's having a flashback and he's back in Vietnam and so I quickly said well look out the other side and he smiled he said no that's a nice looking plant and that's amazing yeah so I was I was on 2020 with this a number of years ago and um uh and a patient who I hadn't met before uh came to our laboratory and uh we had tape goggles where uh there was tape in the middle and you had to look out one lateral visual field or the other and uh and on one side he felt very relaxed on the other side he got upset and anxious and the moderator from uh ABC news said well what are you feeling and he said I feel like going to war and uh uh and this is typical I say this in about 55% of patients in my practice and another 30% have differences but they're not so dramatic they feel more relaxed on one side uh and and the side that that is better uh it tends to be a trade it tends to stay that way for their uh duration sometimes it switches but usually 95% of the time is the same and then about 15% of PE people didn't have any difference between their sides that is fascinating that is so fascinating uh and so I have what I call dual brainy therapy where I talk with two people in one brain and and and I I use special sunglasses that I developed uh that stimulate uh one uh let more light in one lateral visual field than the other and we also have uh an FM now an FM is a uh everybody knows what an MRI machine is and an fmri has special software that measures blood flow in the brain and blood flow is an index of brain activity the more activity the more the blood flows to that uh side or that area of the brain and and ephemeris are used in Neuroscience uh but they don't really reveal much generally over the decades that they've been used they usually present kind of a measles picture and it's hard to interpret but in my study uh when people look to the left visual field for 30 seconds and then the right visual field then repeated it and then when we took seven people who were in the study and crunched the data the uh when they looked to the left the right brain had a a massive increase in in blood flow compared to the other side the other side looked relatively dark AR like a blackout and then when they just looked out the other visual field uh the opposite brain lit up and so with this simple technique um uh I I I I graduated to um using an envelope so if if I cover one eye in the middle of the other eye I I can stimulate uh the uh opposite brain hem spere and if you want to try this uh we can see if if you have a response or not do you have an envelop handy I I don't have an envelope but I have a book if that works but before that I wanted to I wanted to ask you one thing so normally when we associate the left and right brain right so a lot of people know that the left brain is associated more more with logic language analytical thinking and the right is more creative intuitive um and more emotional so if I for example if I I am looking to increase my um logic and analytical thinking which is governed by my left brain should I cover my left eye and look through the right so it has an opposite response in the brain uh I don't find that to happen Okay so so what what I find is uh that people are more symptomatic on one side and less symptomatic on the other and they can speak uh no matter which visual field is blocked uh or or they're looking out and they can move both sides of their body so we know that neurologically uh if someone has a stroke in their right brain they get paralyzed uh on their left side and um uh that if if they have a stroke in their left brain that's for speeches uh they become a phasic and they can't uh uh uh speak or if it depending on the area of the speech center they can't understand language and uh so um so uh motor systems and uh Speech systems uh are are definitely lateralized but this what we're doing doesn't affect that other words this is a different property and uh and so the left brain uh may be more logical uh so you have to uh cover one eye in the middle of the other eye okay so I covering one eye and the middle of the other eye with this book or people who were looking at this on video Yeah and and so I want you to think of something upsetting upsetting okay yeah and and I want you to measure say how much distress you feel from 0 to 10 um not so much to be honest like normally I would be more stressful uh so would you say one or two or nothing um I would say between two to three okay now I want you do the same thing looking at the other side okay now I'm switching my book to the other side covering this eye and thinking about the same situation the other eye half your left eye cover half your left ey okay okay okay okay good and think about the same situation the same upsetting thing now I don't know if this is Placebo or not but what I feel is on the left eye I feel more um emotional yeah um so basically I was thinking about just so people who are listening or watching this have a context I have a dog and I love dogs and I was imagining someone killing a dog on purpose so this is something that is very disgusting and I wouldn't stand it and I would generally be upset either angry or sad or one of those emotions when I covered my left eye and I was looking at it from the right eye it did not trigger me as much as I would think it would but when I covered my right eye and I was looking at it from my left eye it did Spike up an emotion I wouldn't say so much but again we're in a recording podcast so maybe what would you say from zero to 10 um zero to 10 I would say more so um two on the lowest from the right and maybe five on the left well that's a big difference okay so that's more than 100 it was noticeable yeah it's noticeable and and this would change if like for example if I was imagining something of something horrible that happened in my past you mentioned bullying before I was obese as a kid I was bullied as a kid and I also think that you know you mention you mentioned the work trauma and from the work that I read of yours like trauma is also emphasized it could be PTSD or something else but I think um most of the people especially in this part of the world they associate trauma with something big like a terrible accident or they lose someone but um you talk about trauma in many different ways it doesn't have to be the trauma with the capital T it could be small everyday things like bullying which happened when I was in school um I'm talking about like 20 years ago and probably if you ask me now it doesn't affect me so much but did it do at that point yeah a lot now I I wonder if you do that visual thing again and think about the bullying see if it does bother you more on one side than the other so you're looking at your I'm looking out of my right eye fi yeah so it's it's actually not your right eye but your right lateral visual field okay right A lot of people look at the whole eye and that goes to both hemispheres and you don't get a response oh okay so you're looking exactly at the half right okay yeah exactly half yeah okay so and and think about the bully did you have any reaction a bit but not so much so how would you score it from um again I would I would not score at more than three okay and yeah and think about the bullying don't strange it's strange this time I'm not I'm not having a big reaction on my left side it's um if that was three this would be like one uhuh okay but I'm but also I'm so excited to talk to you I don't know if the excitement is changing okay well usually I would expect it to be much higher on on on one side and and it can be either side that that has the negative thing and and and it's I call it what my first book is called of two minds and and what I mean by that is that if someone is um uh uh having a conversation with me uh looking out uh one side say they're troubled sign uh I'll look uh critical like maybe their mother was and that might be a trauma as as you point out that that I I think that U uh severe uh uh you know having an alcoholic father who beats mother and and throws the kid down the stairs repeat I had that okay okay we're going to do many experiments later yeah well that's serious and uh uh but uh but you may not have that in mind in other words that that you may be thinking you know what happened a long time ago and it's not important but that's pretty severe a lot of times it's it's not even that severe it's more uh maybe a distant father who's not very uh involved and and uh is sort of rejecting or a mother I have a lot of men whose mother said oh you're a loser when they came criticizing them yeah criticizing them or with friends or like your teacher or someone who didn't see you in the right light and that kind of stays with a lot of people I meet so many people who say every time you remind them of an emotion that kind of happened in their childhood and they're like oh my God I cannot like you know they they start shaking sometimes so those memories can be really strong yes or they get angry what happens but what happens with that early trauma is uh that you go to school and it's harder to concentrate and then the teacher gets angry with you and so the the trauma then snowballs and then and maybe uh uh peers uh are getting critical because you're not doing well in the athletic field or or or in the classroom and so you wind up making friends with other people who are having trouble and then uh when when a person gets to be an adolescent they they start skipping school or drinking or uh uh and then uh might fail out of college and and each of these things is a great trauma and and if they become uh addicted uh then that's a great trauma they feel that they're an addict and and I like to say I don't have any addicts in my practice I have trauma victims and and that the addiction is an attempt by the immature side to deal with the trauma and and the immature side almost always picks uh solutions that uh uh bring on more trauma and and and and more distress and uh uh that uh when I see people in my practice they're often uh using drugs and and and they're it might be homeless or uh uh and feel really uh that their lives are failed and they have no idea that they have a healthy part to them and uh uh and uh we can elicit that uh with the envelope we can uh and I also have uh another way of stimulating the hemisphere and right now we're doing a a$2 and5 million uh NIH brand is this the LED lights yeah yeah it's an LED that we developed at MGH and we put it over the forehead um on one side say my uh left brain is my positive hemosphere and uh and it's it's just a 4minute treatment and the FDA has determined that has no significant risk and we haven't seen any uh side effects from it and uh can you talk to us about how it works like so basically it's a light that goes on the forehead and is the the light pulsating at a certain frequency or it's like uh moving the blood flow into a certain part of the brain maybe The Logical Center or the emotional Center or an area that needs some help um uh the light goes and the reason we picked it is near Red Light it goes through the skull oh no way yeah and and uh and it's called photobiomodulation and and it does a lot of good things to the brain uh but I don't think that's what I'm doing in other words it stimulates energy production decreases inflammation increases blood flow it it does a lot of um uh uh good things to the brain and it doesn't do anything that is known to be harmful to the brain uh it's interesting because I don't know if you know this but I have um at one of my companies bioh Haagen we are we have photo modulation products and we developed yeah we developed a cap with red and near infrared light but these are the the LED lights are placed at certain parts different areas of the brain it's designed to stimulate the brain and um do some sort of a brain wave entrainment where we can teach the brain slowly on go how to go into like you know 10 HZ frequency or like a 40 HZ gamma brain w frequency but I did not know these LED lights were like uh near infrared the ones we use is for red and near infrared um it was developed for like athletes and people who are like Executives but most of the people now use it for hair loss because it has a it's got an effect on increasing the blood flow on the hair follicles and then it stimulates hair growth this is fascinating I did not know this yes uh now but you're you're simulating both sides and and and uh so what I do is simulate one side and um and and in this grant we're treating fentanyl addiction and it's our third clinical trial and uh and we we uh in our first two trials got uh uh great results and so the FDA has given us a breakthrough designation and and uh and that's why we have this big Grant from it's from NIH the National Institute for drug abuse congratulations and um uh and uh half the people are getting a sham treatment uh and I don't know who's getting active in sham but I do know that uh if I rank the people according to uh how much they've decreased or fentanyl the top half uh have an 80% decrease in Fentanyl and a lot of them have stopped their fentanyl the bottom half have a 16% decrease and and some of them have have gotten worse uh and so they may be getting the I I'm hoping that the bottom half are getting sham and the top half are getting active treatment uh uh and I think that that's probably true because it's hard to treat a fentanyl with a poo yeah I would I would ask you like what is what do you think is the mechanism of action there is it that okay so what I think again I mentioned that there are known to be a lot of good things that happen with the brain but not in four minutes okay so someone can get a four minute treatment and uh and you'll notice the when we did the ey uh maneuver uh that takes place in seconds so so your response was um uh with within a few seconds and um uh with the light uh we give a 4minute treatment usually the person feels the difference in about 2 and a half minutes so and it's a special light that we developed it's very intense it's um uh 240 mowatt per cm squared and so so your lights are probably uh 10 m or something that and uh um and it's in a it's in one location and so it's concentrated so yeah so we're trying to simulate the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex so we put it over that and the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex is a hub uh for the brain it's an association area and uh I'm trying to stimulate a mind so uh so I think that what what I'm doing is having actually a Quantum effect now I don't know that but I think that um uh uh that I think I'm stimulating uh brain information that becomes conscious and and that creates a conscious mind that has a different body of information it's a more positive body of information and I'm able to make it conscious if I put the light on the other side just like with the visual thing uh the the person will have a more negative uh Outlook and and uh uh uh they won't go into a catastrophe if you put it on the negative side but they'll have their symptoms that they came in with does everyone have a different negative and a positive side or is it standard for everyone it's pretty standard in terms of what I've seen over decades that that um uh that rather than uh it it being more logical or more artistic uh it's more uh uh symptomatic and neurotic uh versus healthy and sensible and and um uh I had an experience where it was the first time I was about 5 years after I wrote my first book and I was on a vacation in Italy and my wife was driving and we had a 5-Hour drive to an apartment that we rented and uh and I I was feeling uncomfortable my wife is a good driver and she was driving and and uh and I felt like we were going to have an accident and I and I noticed after about an hour that the road was really safe it was like any road uh uh uh you know in in in the US that I drive one and um and then after a while uh I decided to put my hands up and block my vision and I was looking out my uh right lateral visual field which would stimulate my left brain and all of that anxiety went away just immediately and I looked out the other side and I got a Vavoom of anxiety and then we got to the the apartment and it had a balcony uh looking at over a road so I'm up on a balcony uh and and if I look out my uh right um uh my left uh um um um Lal Vision if I looked at my my left lateral visual field simulating my right brain uh I got very anxious and so they that I'm looking at cars on the on a road it was a it wasn't a highway it was a a back road but it was uh and I felt like the cars were sort of going to jump up and hit me and and I said well that's crazy you know and and I looked out the other side and felt perfectly safe and it was a normal Road and and uh and I had to wrestle with myself for about a day I said do I want to ruin the vacation I want to be crazy orane and and uh uh and I was able to Prevail but it with all my experience and you know writing a book and and and and it turned out I realized a few years later not at that time that it had to do with some trauma that I had experienced that being in Italy brought up and and um um and so that was the first time that I had experienced uh the the lateral visual effect and and I use it now if if I'm under stress I can get an envelope and look out and I use the uh light uh on most days I try and use it every day sometimes I I'll miss a day and I think it's good for cognitive enhancement and uh that's so interesting could it were you um were you at any point when this this thing was happening this episodes of feeling scared or nervous or anxiety yeah um was your sleep the same as it is all the time CU here here's something that I'm thinking I have experienced something similar especially but I've made some long travels but one of the things that I also think is that sometimes I cannot sleep on the airplane then there is jet lag and you know then we know that the emotional side of the brain like flares up or has more activity when you are a bit sleep deprived and your brain is confused on what's going on and could for the everyday person could that also trigger something some sort of a negative experience yeah that's absolutely true uh there was a movie with Steve Martin and Lilly Tomlin I do you know who they are no but I will look them up uh uh well Steve Martin is a a comedian and he he's in the US uh he he's sort of retired now but but he he was um at the height of his um uh popularity and was very famous and and uh and Lily Tomlin was also a comedian uh and uh so the story is that Lily Tomlin is meditating with her Guru and there's a terrible accident that the humming bow slips out of the guru's hands and tumbles down a a a huge flight of stairs in Manhattan and as a result l tomlin's mind gets embedded in Steve Martin's brain and and uh so you have uh Steve Martin in as the embodiment and Billy Tomlin wants to go downtown and Steve Martin wants to go uptown so he's going like this back and forth and she's screaming at him you know she wants to go here and he's trying to resist now if someone came by and and encouraged Lily Tomlin uh and then uh she would have gotten stronger and so if if something encourages the negative side say that you know someone is inducing somebody to use fentanyl that that'll arouse the negative side and it actually becomes stronger and uh so if Lily Tomlin was yelling loud enough she might have gotten her way and G downtown uh that the two sides can compete and they often when a patient comes in the two sides are often fighting and trying to kill each other or or they they don't acknowledge each other they and and what I do in dual brain Psychotherapy is to get them to cooperate and and to treat the trauma uh in the troubl side and use the healthy side as a co-therapist to help treat the trauma so uh you I think that you're right that um uh that uh external events can influence either side in other words If U uh uh let's say somebody wakes up and they're anxious and depressed and they get a phone call from work and there's a problem that they have to solve all of a sudden the depression anxiety go away and their business they're all business and and they attend to the problem the brain shifts the focus yeah yeah it it'll strengthen the mature side it'll Rouse the mature side so that these two minds are influenced by outside events and influenced by each other and uh that I'll teach the patient how to talk with the uh the troubl side and and he can influence it and and um and the troubled side often batters and and abuses the the healthy side now just because you mentioned the guru and meditation I wanted to bring up another thing like in the Eastern I'm originally from India and in the Eastern philosophy especially when it comes to yoga and yogis culture they have um they have a similar idea they talk about two sorts of like energy channels in the body which Al goes up to the brain which is the feminine side is Ida which is more creative more lunar energy you'll hear all these things in like the these are the terminologies and the male style is more masculine more logical and the goal is that these two are always fluctuating no one has like a complete balance like if you're a guru you probably have like a complete balance uh where there's a center point but in almost all of us there are these opposite Yin and yangs that are working all the time and and uh one could in certain situations get more agitated can be more anxiety prone and this is what we see today like you mentioned you know external events like even having substances like uh having two cups of coffee instead of one or you know just um looking at your screen for long amounts of time with the blue light and how it messes the Circadian rhythm and then there's a downstream effect on different things but you said something even interesting the two sides of the brain I I can't remember from who but years ago I read that yes of course you have these different sides of the brain and it also helps if you name them if you name um you know like my name is CJ and I would say cj1 or cj2 just for Simplicity and this is when you know that cj1 as in this part of your brain is becoming more dominant right now and while you while you don't get involved in the emotion this allows you to take a step back and observe the different parts of their brain and how they're communicating with each other so one part is being nasty or trying to kind of like sabotage the other one you could just say hey cj1 I see what you're doing like you know I want you know you some I don't know if it makes sense but it kind of like helps you even better than being a victim of the situation and saying like I'm I'm so stress thrown and my day isn't getting good if you take a step back and you say okay this part of my brain seems a bit overactive right now can I you know with meditation or just by talking or you know covering one eye can I influence one of these what's your thought on that uh yes I I agree with you and and uh and I have Fred and Freddy uh okay good and and most of my patients you know I have two names you know usually you know their their regular name and and I put an ie you know uh uh to for a dimin uh term for the the child more I don't like the term in a child because I think it's overused and and and and kind of um uh devalued uh uh but but it is but what I'm talking about is an inner child and um U and and I think to give them two different names I think is is a is a reality they're two different people and and uh and I think it makes it easier to talk to them and so I'll have a conversation with Freddy and and uh um and it might be 3:00 in the morning you know if I wake up and I I get downstairs and and get a snack and I sit down and talk to Freddy and and uh uh and during the day um uh uh you know Fred needs to be in charge the light treatment stimulate the mature side and um and and the envelope can help in that regard yeah the envelope is really good it's it gives Everyday People access because if someone is listening to this or someone is um looking at at us on video that is such a lwh hanging fruit that everyone can do no matter where they are and they don't have to have access to sophisticated technology of course the technology is so much more faster and has much more results but let's say someone's just having a bad day and you know if they have the power to just choose something like you know I had that book right here where I had my notes and if they could do it right in the moment it's a good thing for them because like like you said the snowballing effect we don't realize it but for the average person uh you know their boss is stress stressing them out then they have a stress out day they miss the gym they eat junk then they go have a fight with their partner then they have a fight with their kids kids are angry kids develop trauma so this is like it starts off with the smallest thing and if we give people the opportunity or the knowledge and I'm so grateful that you're putting all of this great work out there that yeah you can use Advanced things but like start off with the simple thing it's and also I have my book that I'm I put up here to my book U uh this this just came out this is my shout out everyone please check out uh it's called the goodbye anxiety uh depression addiction PTSD the life-changing science of dual brain psychology and it's an easy read uh uh so a lot of people might be intimidated uh uh by um um a book you know that has to do with science and but the science is is presented in a very easy to understand way and uh and there there's a chapter on self-help and and uh oh that's good and and their narrative fictional descriptions of actual therapy sessions um and and U uh so people tell me that it's an easy read that's good we will put the link in the show notes so everyone who can buy it they can buy it from us or anywhere internationally now I want to ask you a question you've been I mean you've been with Harvard for such a long time and we know like really interesting things come out of there are they working on something secretive or like not secretive let's say like do you know about like projects studies devices that have been developed right now that could change the way our mental health is in the future I know that they're doing a lot of things in longevity and uh you know the future of biology psychology um and Neuroscience and all of these things combined so do you know of anything that is exciting for you uh don't okay I think I think that um uh when I started at mlan it was a psychoanalytic Bastion you you can't find a psychoanalyst at mlan anymore or any any respectable hospital it's all drugs and insurance and people come in uh they they hardly get talked to and they just get put on medications and then discharged quickly and uh and I I I find that the state of psychiat today is very toxic and I think that Neuroscience uh has not resulted in in much knowledge uh or uh and or Therapeutics uh you know that there there is ketamine and there are Psych uh uh and and there uh the these might pan out to be um uh important developments but they seem to have uh problems and and uh um um I I I don't know that they're going to revolutionize the treatment of Psychiatry so but a lot of people are using it now right like MDMA I know John Hopkins is doing a lot of research with uh MDA assisted Psychotherapy and then of course ketamine um I've even heard some stories about like DMT uh administers straight and looking at like how the regions of the brain are changing or how people's subjective experiences are changing under the same um modality yes and and I don't know um uh of research at mlan I mean it might be going on but I don't know about it with using these substances MH and um uh so uh uh to answer your question I I not that I'm aware of okay in terms of some secret breakthrough okay cool um let's talk about something else you know Elon Musk has been talking about like putting a chip into people's brain he calls it the neuralink what do you think about that do you think uh there is any efficacy of this or do you think in the future sure like for example instead of using the LED lights or using the envelope we could just plant a chip in our brain and then have like our iPhone as a remote controller and say okay stimulate Freddy now and stimulate Fred now do you think the future could look like this um you know I don't I really don't know how the chip would operate you know so the chip would would I assume have some intelligence to it and and uh uh and uh there there is a modality called transcranial direct electral simulation I've done that and and U and if you uh the one side stimulates and the other side inhibits if you put it on front and and uh and that's been used to treat depression and and usually they'll stimulate the left side and and try and inhibit the right side and so you can sort of use electricity to stimulate uh you probably could use electrical Fields uh now uh we did some interesting studies with rtms so rtms uses a a magnetic field that causes a current in the brain MH and and for some reason that's unknown they all they only want to stimulate the left side the idea that uh left is good and right is bad uh is is kind of grounded in in in Psychology and Neuroscience um so I we did two studies uh to uh that what we find is about that there probably is more people who have a positive left brain but particularly in people with severe PTSD they're lot lot of times their left brain is their negative side and so um uh I would say generally but it's about 6040 the split and so you have to test people individually with to see which side is their positive side and their negative side so we did this with a group uh who were getting TMS which is a trans Grom magnetic stimulation it's a treatment for depression and uh and what we found was that if somebody had a negative left hemisphere uh they didn't do well with TMS if their left brain were were their positive side they did well and and we repeated this uh and and and got the same results with a uh one study was at Harvard uh with a uh at Bethal Hospital a different facility and I didn't run the study I just lent them uh uh the glasses to test the Baseline uh hemispheric balance and and the other study was done in Canada but we got the the same results and also there were gender differences that were matched and and uh uh uh so what what we found was that if you stimulate with the magnet uh a negative left brain uh you're not going to get a good result and the results with TMS are are mediocre uh and um uh that we we had much higher result in people with the Positive left brain who were getting their left brain stimulated and I tried to convince people uh to uh stimulate the right side in in those people who have uh their right side as their positive brain and no one would do it and that's how I got interested in the in the photobiomodulation I wanted something to stimulate the hemisphere more powerfully I I didn't have to Lug up three flights of stairs with a heavy machine and uh uh and it turned out that it it worked beyond our wildest expectations that's amazing if you ever come to Dubai just bring it with you and we can test it with a lot of people over here I'm sure we have a lot of guinea pigs who will say I want to test it and see how it works we have a huge community of biohackers and you know held people here this is so fascinating you know I have a headset um which is an American company is called um blank out on the name I need some brain stimulation but um the idea is that they have a visor which it which has LED lights and this LED lights are flickering in a certain way um which can get you into the Alpha Brain wve State they have a headphone which has lights which are going into the ear canal Lo light um at 450 nanom and red light at 660 nanom and they're using Chinese Meridian and acupuncture points to get a signal into the brain the headsets itself has different kind of isochronic tones um binaural beads and a lot of these other kind of sound Technologies but the most interesting thing that I found was that they found a way to let's say let's to keep it simple they found a way to induce three sets of sounds at the same time so one is coming from the left ear one is coming from the right ear and then there is a subconscious programming message going on which could be self-help or you know talking about your traumas and how you can release them but the immediate effect of all these stimulation going in your brain is that if you lie down with lights closed it'll take you to that Delta brain wave state where you're just you feel like you're sleeping but you're not really sleeping and then the program is going on for like 25 minutes by the end of the program you wake up if you if you really went to sleep you don't remember what's going on but your subconscious mind registers it and the more often you do it then you have a change in your behavior your perspective your way of thinking just because the sounds are going through different um you know different ear passages and they say that they are stimulating different parts of the brain uh yes I think sound does cross over and and it's not as powerful uh neurologic connection as the eyes but but the ears are connected to the opposite brain uh and um um and so I I think that's really interesting I'm not aware of that technology and and it might be that if they did a baseline uh test with with the uh envelope uh that they might reverse uh uh the earphones and and uh and some individuals and and and improve their results I don't know that just a suggestion I would I would be excited to see like your LED lights with uh transcranial direct simulation with the headphones with like you know a biohacker tech which goes through maybe in the next two to three years or the next five years which goes through all of the different entry points and then you know has different mechanisms of action and like gets us into an altered state or like a state which is preferable um yeah so I'm excited about that hopefully that happens sometime soon I have a patent pending uh on a device that uses music and and I I play caling music uh opposite the uh troubled side and uh so it's not as sophisticated as what you're describing uh but uh but I I have you know been you know playing around a little bit with sound but um uh um um but you know what what you're describing is interesting and and I'll email you the link of the device they're really big yeah I'll do that okay um Dr shiffer this has been super exciting thank you so much for your time we have covered so many things and I think people have like a better idea on um what dual brain psychology is if you don't please read the book I'm also going to link to his website and some of the other things so you can take a deeper read but before I let let you go is there anything that you want to share any you know tips practical stuff what you want people to see what you want people to do anything the floor is yours uh I think that the real breakthrough occurs when you teach uh in other words not tell the the the trouble side but get the trouble side to think and and say uh do do you think that you really were a bad child uh and and and get to sort of have a Socratic discussion with it and when the when the uh little boy or little girl is able to go aha I'm really not bad uh I really don't need to fear the bullies uh that's when uh the person really gets better okay interesting thank you so much thank you so much for all the good work that you're doing thank you for giving us your time thank you for getting on the podcast so early before I let you go my last question to you is if you could reverse time let's say we made a technology developed and we put you into a time capsule you could go back to younger self but only for like 30 seconds and you could give back your younger self one piece of advice what would that be uh well I I I I don't know I think things have played out it's just taken too long you know that that so that uh uh you know I'm uh in my 80s now you know and and uh and I have so much more work to do and uh uh so you know I wish all this happened faster but it takes time to make discoveries and and and uh especially if you're discovering something that is sounds strange and it's hard to get other people uh to um join in the the other thing that I think happens is there's a line from Shakespeare that says uh there is a tide in the Affairs of men which Shen at the flood leads on the fortune and and uh uh and I think if I were researching drugs in in in the 1980s it would have been easy to promote myself uh and and promote what I was doing uh but this this you know is not supported by any outside flow I'm the only person working on the hemispheres and and and you know I have colleagues at mlan who work with me uh uh uh and the NIH has been good to me um uh but um uh and also the US Army is uh applying for a very large Grant to treat to depression and combat PTSD with my light and and uh so but but there hasn't been really a stream of of I'm I'm always swimming Upstream okay but I don't know how to answer the question except that I I think um uh things have worked out well for me and it's just a life you know takes time and has its obstacles I guess I then the lesson that we can share with everyone is of patience and persistence and believing in what you do because yes you're right it takes time um whenever we hear stories of others we always hear like how fast things have happened but we don't see those countless million stories which were either unsuccessful they never got to the place or it took too much time because we always romanticizing the idea of things becoming fast and instant gratification a good way to think about is like if you want a child like you know you can you can make someone pregnant but it still takes nine it still take nine months you cannot sleep with nine people and expect you know the baby in a month nature and some some things have its own time and the faster you understand it and are peace with it at least you won't stimulate the other side of your brain how about that how about we close with that lesson good okay yeah it's been a pleasure thank you thank you this has been pleasure for me as well and this is CJ everyone your host your friend signing out of the ship for CJ podcast everyone have an amazing day amazing week Amazing Life find a book find an envelope try to do this experiment read his book and remember good things in life will take time be patient this is me signing out of the shipit CJ podcast take care everyone [Music]
[Music] Hey guys, welcome back to the podcast. Quick intro. I got a special guest today for this episode as we've done many times on here. This was a really cool talk. I now have spoken to a couple of doctors here the last couple months. Um, this is Dr. Schiffer. His first name is Frederick and he's a medical doctor and he's been doing things for a long time. He has a new book called Goodbye Anxiety, Depression, Addiction, and PTSD. And his theory is The Life-Changing Science of Dual Brain Psychology. So, without further ado, here is my talk with Dr. Schiffer. Hi. I uh I got your book, but I haven't really read too much of it. Um, and I was listening to to something that you did. But, um, yeah, I'll just kind of give you a little brief um, [Music] uh, thing about me and then we'll just get into, you know, your stuff. But, um, and really the path that I've gone down with my bipolar diagnosis has really just been a lot of, um, medication really. Um, I've never really been able to, uh, you know, wean off the meds, however you want to say it, and kind of transition into, you know, managing my illness without the the medication. I I think that um, yeah, the diagnostic system of psychiatry does a great deal of harm. And um yeah, and I think that um bipolar u uh was created by some colleagues of mine at MLAN and um and I wouldn't refer my dog to them, you know, and and uh it comes from um um uh you know that manic depressive illness. And I've seen one manic patient uh in my career. Uh and and that was a patient I saw in medical school who had a full-blown mania and and walked a mile a minute. And then they've kind of um deluded that and pretended that if did you ever go shopping? Did you enjoy it? Oh, right. Over overspending. Yeah. It just Yeah, it gets um Yeah. Well, yeah. I guess yeah, I have a lot of thoughts on it, but I mean, I do want to hear what you So, I I I would say I I've been suicidal. I almost died from I'm not I'm not saying that you don't have problems or the people who get Right. Right. don't have problems, but they make it sound like, you know, it's it's a medical illness and it's not. It's trauma. Yeah. for sure. And I think even using I do I've done a lot of work with the National Alliance of Mental Illness mostly as a speaker a little bit of leading some groups and it's interesting that they're you know it's been around for a while and it's like oh you guys are using you know illness and then people get offended and then that goes into the disease model also with substances too and like if you say it's an illness I don't have any addicts in my practice right yeah but um But yeah, I do I I think you said it at the beginning of the book. It's like, okay, it's either meds or psychotherapy, right? And you know, I do think there's like, you know, you can think your way into certain emotions, right? Obviously, if you're having like constant negative thoughts, but my experience of being on meds for a while, my complaint and um which I've talked about on here is like yeah, it makes you feel it's like it feels like bipolar is the diagnosis that you get when you have an episode because th that's that's how the diagnosis happens. I didn't sleep for like a month and that's why I got put on medication and obviously it was a desperate chaotic experience which is what a lot of people go through and so you're not really thinking through hey if I stay in these meds for the next 20 years cuz now I'm coming up on 2008 I've been on Cerakquil and I'm still on it and the times I've tried to get on it what' you say what what's does. Well, I'm I'm I went up to 600 from 500 and I used to be That's very dangerous. Yeah. And I used to be on 1,500 for three years from a doctor who was crazy and I took three other things and then I tried to get off all of it and I almost died because I had like a nine-month episode. What you can do though is go very slowly taper. Well, yeah. And I just tried to do an adjustment the end of January from 600 to 450 with the doctor. And it's kind of a newer doctor because my That's too much. You You got to go from 650 to 550. Oh, too too big of a jump, right? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. But do you think um do you think I've never really been able to no nor have I tried very hard to really be like hey could I get down to 200 or 100 and I mean because I've been so used to this high dose for so long I'm getting some free medical advice here I guess but I and I take um guanosine and then neurontin although neurontin I that was something I took a long time ago and then I got back on it. So, I've had a couple of episodes in the last year from trying to be like, hey, I want to get off the meds. And it it does bring a great deal of discomfort to me, but then also it's like, yeah, my complaint is I don't feel great a lot, right? And it's like I think that's the effect of if you had a time machine, you're like, "Hey, I wish I could go back and not have stayed on this stuff as long as I have, you know." Um, but anyway, that's that's that's kind of where I've been at with that. But maybe I can ask you more about it, you know, through email or a text or something. But um but yeah, what is your So you have this book, Goodbye Anxiety, Depression, and PTSD. And it sounds like you have some unique kind of takes on trauma, which I feel like um I've read a little bit of The Body Keeps the Score, which is kind of the big book on trauma. I'm sure you're aware of that. Um and I know Bessel. Yeah, that's cool. That's cool. Yeah. Didn't Didn't he Isn't he It's Didn't he study in Massachusetts? He's in Massachusetts. Okay. Yeah. I've read some of the books. He was in Harvard for the beginning of his career and and um then he went to Boston University. Now he's independent. Awesome. Boston University. Uh good hockey team. Um yeah. So, so I know you have like I guess maybe we just start there like what is your how long have you been studying these things or is your background like medical doctor and then also psychiatry as well? Yeah, actually that's an interesting point. So I started out in internal medicine and and did a internship in residency in internal medicine. Came to Harvard to do a fellowship in cardiology and and completed that and we published some important papers in and cardiology but but they were on stress and heart disease. Okay. And um and developed a a um like an exercise test but was an emotional stress test. uh uh and and it was actually very good um and and it should be used today, but it it's unless somebody's behind um a product or or an idea, it dies. And um so I I went into psychiatry to get more of an education about psycho cardiology and uh and after I completed my training at MLAN uh at Harvard uh I learned that cardiologist and cardiac patients didn't want anything to do with the psychiatrist and uh so I just stayed on at MLAN. I've been at MLAN since uh I started decades ago and so I'm now a happy psychiatrist. Okay. So you you you do see people like regularly and prescribe medication. Yeah, you do that carefully and with with a lot of um you know, are you careful about how you put people on things and are you like telling them, hey, you shouldn't stay on this for more than a year or something like that or or how does that go? Uh I I prescribe medication but uh mostly I work on psychotherapy and on this on the work that we'll talk about it's a theory of dual brain psychology and uh and how that applies uh both in the consultation room and we're doing a a large study for NIH uh which I don't know if it still exists Um uh but uh we're we're completing the study uh and it's for fentanyl addiction and we're getting great results blinded but but um about half the people are doing very well and about half who probably are on the sham treatment although I don't know who's on what treatment. uh but I doubt that a sham treatment or placebo is going to treat fentanyl addiction and and uh but we have a number of we we have a large number of people who in the study have done very well uh and and we're very pleased with that. We we think that the results are going to be uh terrific. Yeah. Yeah. Wow. That's cool. Yeah. That's the National Institute of Health or something, right? And Yeah. Okay. and our second it's our phase two study and our phase one study we we also got great results and and the treatment is something that was derived from the theory. So the theory is actionable in psychotherapy and uh also had there are some applications that I I can discuss. Okay. Yes. Yeah. Yeah. So your idea um well so with trauma obvious um right it's kind of like what is trauma? I mean I think that that most people listening probably know what what it is. Right. there's different levels of, you know, a car accident or actually want to say that uh sometimes is obvious. Okay, so if you have a violent alcoholic father, uh uh or if there's sexual abuse, uh it's it's obvious what the trauma is. or if you're a combat veteran, uh you know, where you've been traumatized, but mostly uh it's insidious and it might be a father who doesn't have time for you or is doesn't have a friendly relationship with you or a mother who's kind of putting you down or a sibling uh who's bullying you or a neighbor who bullies you and or someone who ridicules you. And then what happens is then you go to school and uh then you can't read because you're you're coming to school with all this nonsense that was going on somewhere else. And then you get blamed for being dyslexic and and and then uh the other kids don't relate to you and you feel like an alchemist and the only people that you can relate to are other people who are traumatized and they're on drugs and drinking alcohol. at in seventh grade, right? And uh and then by the time person becomes an alcoholic, he forgets all about how it happened and it's his fault and he goes to an AA meeting and and raises hand says, "Hi, I'm Fred. I'm an alcoholic." Right? And and uh and I think that that's just another trauma. So I think that most for trauma for most people is more insidious and often uh unknown or undiscovered. Sometimes uh it's it's really uh forgotten. Uh I had a patient who uh had uh cavities in all her teeth and she's in her late 50s and u and I asked her if um she had any bad experiences, you know, she's an intelligent woman and and uh uh uh very competent, but she wasn't brushing her teeth. And uh I said, "Did you have any problem with the dentist?" uh uh or uh you know some kind of trauma and and then she remembered but she hadn't talked about this before and um and she had plenty of opportunity to she she fell u I think she was about 9 years old and broke all of her teeth from the front of her face and and had a lot of surgery and and uh and it was a very traumatic experience for her. And after we dealt with that, she was able to to get her mouth repaired and and uh uh but so here was a a severe trauma that was causing a problem for her uh that she um it wasn't that she had amnesia about it, but it wasn't in her awareness. Okay. Yeah, it seems to be Yeah, that makes sense. Yeah, I think uh for me I think it seems obvious more just because I've had this podcast and you know I've been talking about these things even before I've had the podcast and um but it does seem to be more um more of a a a thing in the you know in the in the language of of mental health. But it does seem that um yeah I do agree with you. I think it's like you have a trauma like to your example with the alcoholic and then you you're in in distress pain and you um I think we we can just default to like numbing ourselves out with um a lot of things. Substances is in there a lot, food, um sex, you know, whatever. Especially in the American culture with just kind of the access to like phones and internet, TV and like so many things done in excess kind of you know become a disservice to us. What is your And then the other layer is like my understanding is that like like to my example like I had a bipolar episode then I got put on all these meds and the long-term treatment I guess other than therapy is it doesn't seem like the medication gets to the root of what's bothering you if it is trauma. And it just kind of seems then it prolongs like it's it's keeping you stable but then you're not really healing, you know. That's true. In fact, yeah, it is a trauma, you know, that that uh just, you know, being called bipolar is like being called a son of a a gun, you know. Well, it's so common in the in the language, too. Like, but so is alcoholic. Yeah. Well, that's true. Yeah. And and so, you know, if you call me Fred the alcoholic, it's uh you know, it's it's no matter how you frame it and how how nice you're supposed to be, it's an insult, you know, or not something makes you feel good. Mr. Trump. Well, I think part of it is this this this goes against things I've participated in and I also just got a job as a peer support special. I should probably be careful what I say. I agree. And I'm I'm I'm not uh uh I I uh love uh uh people who uh have substance problems and and uh uh uh and so I'm not uh what I'm saying is is that right it's not their fault, but they're getting blamed and they're getting traumatized. So I'm not trying to stigmatize somebody. I'm sure that that the diagnosis is stig stigmatizing and traumatizing. Yeah. Well, yeah. I think what's happened for a while because of the internet, because of um social media, now if you're not on those things, you might be like, "Oh, well, I don't go to my work break room and just just reminisce about being bipolar with my other bipolar friend at work." But I think online and with stuff like NAMI or DBSA, there's support groups, right? Which is essentially the same similar to AA or NA just for for mental illness. And the idea is that you go to these groups and then you say the thing out loud that you feel shame about, which is your diagnosis. And then by saying it out loud, I feel less alone after 30 minutes or an hour. I said, "Oh, I'm not the only one that is hypersexual when I'm bipolar." And oh yeah, see these symptoms in the DSM. Oh, yeah. Yeah, I do that, too. You gamble, I gamble. But my experience, um, and it's like I, you know, should take my own advice. It's like, well, I still subject myself to these groups and I go, I I think we're o I, well, I have to speak for myself, not other people. I'm over identifying with it too much to the point where I go, well, well, is that my only identity? And I guess that maybe that's also true cuz I go to 12step meetings, too, cuz you know, I guess I have a lot of issues here. And so it's like, does that make sense that you overidentify with the thing? And what what what people want to know is how to get better. I mean or I mean I hope they want to know like who I don't want to just sit around and talk about how sad I am and call that ac acceptance because I think that that's how it's been pitched. Let me tell you about what I do and ask about do I prescribe. Um I do prescribe but I'm I'm for most people I don't prescribe anything. Uh if I do prescribe something, it's often going to be something to help somebody sleep or uh Well, that's me with the cerakquil. Yeah. Yeah. Well, cerakquil. Well, it's not the only thing, but you mean like ambient or tradone or, you know, something maybe. Yeah. Anyway, well, sleep's a big thing when you start, but but generally I I don't I don't think that the pills are smart. Okay. Well, I'm glad that I'm glad that some way to go, you know, to fix it. Yeah. Sorry, I didn't mean to interrupt. I'm glad that um I'm you're saying that as a medical doctor because I mean I haven't had a ton of um I just had Dr. Robert Smith on which was cool, but um I haven't had a lot of doctors on here. I've had I had one friend Michelle who got off all her meds bipolar and that you know and I have friends who are like hey man have you thought about you know getting off the meds. I mean it's just it's such a big decision because I don't want to I'm not advising anybody. No, I know you're not getting and uh if you do you're you're going to go into withdrawal and you're going to get very sick and you got to be very careful. Yeah. Got to be very careful. uh uh and and it may be that u uh you know for for a given person a certain medication might be helpful but I think that the whole philosophy in psychiatry uh changed in the 1980s in in the 60s and 70s and 50s uh psychoanalysis was in its heyday and u and you couldn't be anywhere in academic psychiatry country unless you were a psychoanalyst and today uh you can't find a psychoanalyst at an academic center. They just don't exist. Okay. It's it's all and what I saw in the 1980s at MLAN uh I was an attending psychiatrist and what is MLAN again? Is that a hospital? MLAN is the flagship hospital Harvard Psychiatric Hospital. Gotcha. And it's sort of like a, you know, the old asylum in the 198 1980s back in the 188. I got you. I was distracted for a second cuz I was like John Mlan Die Hard. I was like I figured Okay. Anyway, sorry. Keep going. like if I didn't know what that ML is is supposedly is, you know, the the number one psychiatric hospital in the country and and uh Okay. But what what does number one mean? You mean just most world report they have a big sign out front saying that but but I think the psychiatric care today even at MLAN uh has a lot to be desired okay and uh that's just my opinion okay and um that uh I was part of the attending staff and we were a group of about 20 uh experienced therapists who had offices and secretarial staff in Mclain and in the 19 1993 they suddenly sort of like with Trump uh they disbanded the attendings psychiatrist and and today you know people don't get talked to a great deal uh they get put on medicine and and so I think psychiatry has really progressed where I think in the sometimes when uh I would see somebody four times a week and while we were an impatient and the insurance companies paid for two months uh uh this blue cross paid as the standard and and people got better. What you mean? Wait, you mean two months of inpatient like 60 days as as opposed to like a 5150 3 days or like a lot of places it's very short term you know they kick you out after a week that's very rare to find a play so is 1983 is this the Reagan administration because he he did away with a lot of 93 I think okay got you okay yeah keep going so yeah it's just yeah you're so the state of psychiatry today is where there's a philosophy right? Uh that uh psychiatric problems are mental illnesses and uh and they're in in in this DSM uh five R now which I think is is the dumbest book I've ever written. And that's the most recent one, right? 2013 14. Yeah. It's been updated since then. Uh I don't read it. Oh, okay. No, it's okay. I I I listened to uh Alan Francis's book Saving Normal about how he was on the board and you know how he just thinks all you know I'm sure you guys have similar opinions about just the the the criteria keeps expanding and expanding and expanding as far as what we could do you know we can get two two more people we could sit in the room and we could say let's come up with a diagnosis what about son of a [ __ ] Yeah. Yeah. Now, what are their criteria? Well, they curse a lot. They drink a lot. Son of a [ __ ] is a dumb, you know, and uh and let's let's let's find seven criteria. Uh it's interesting for for this study that I'm doing for the FDA uh for treating fate mentioning we're doing treating fentanyl addiction. Okay. With a treatment that I came up with, okay. Uh and uh so uh the FDA uh wanted us to uh get a um a DSN diagnosis on these people and and that consists of asking 11 questions. And these 11 questions are all identical really. You know, do do you ever crave opiates? Uh do you does it interfere with your work? uh uh do you go into dangerous places? Uh and and so it's really the same question 11 times and and the majority of people I would say 90% score all 11. Uh the lowest score is nine. Uh and to have a severe uh opioid use disorder, you have to score more than eight. So uh uh and it's it's really silly. You said that the common score is 90. No. Um I'm the the common score is uh 11 out of 11. Oh, okay. Okay. 11. And and and some people the lowest score that we see is nine out of 11. Oh, nine. Okay. That's the And so it doesn't really tell you anything. Uh and they're the same. It's really the same question over and over again. And that's deciding if you're addicted to it. That's what you're saying. That's right. Yeah. If you have uh more than two, you have an opioid use disorder. Oh, I see. So, two out of 11 questions. Yeah. You're already You're already What is What is fentanyl again? I mean, I I feel like I should fentanyl is what has replaced heroin. You can't You can't get heroin anymore. You get fentanyl. And fentanyl is 50 to 100 times more potent than heroin. and it's very very hard to get off. It's extremely addicting and people spend their day uh using it and then go into withdrawal, they use it again. So, they use it several times a day and they spend all their money on it and they can't work and and a few people work on it, but they're unusual, right? And the only kind of quick um there is that medical show called The Pit on HBO. I've seen some of it. It's like uh kind of like a modern ER kind of show, but like the girl overdoses and she's in the car and they give her the Narcan and the nose. So that's that's a quick thing. It's in schools, but that that still people are still dying because they could take too much and Narcan might not and it's it kills uh I don't know I don't keep statistics in my head. Uh but but but it's a it's a a tremendous number. And in every city, uh, you have, um, uh, sections of the city where people are living in tents or sleeping on the sidewalk and and and shooting up and and and the city tries to push them from one place to another and yeah, LA is like an hour away from me and there's a lot of I mean, there's homeless people, you know, cities over from where I'm at, too. But but like yeah, I'm sure there's lots of that going on in all those places. But it's also like kids in high school or teenagers as well. It's not just reserved for, you know, like people on the streets because you would assume that that's kind of already there. So, well, that people in the streets are endstage. Uh but but that's where you go start it because it's so addicting you can't get off it, right? and and except that we're getting really good results in our study. So, uh the uh half of people uh we're we're enrolling 130 people and and uh and the uh uh we we have a lot of dropouts uh but I think they're mostly in the sham group. So half the group half of the patients get um uh uh active uh treatment and and and half get a sham treatment and of uh and about half the people are doing very well and about half are doing very poorly. Okay. So yeah, so this and I wish I would have uh read more read more of the book, but um I I I'll have to get more into it. Um but I'm I'm glad to be talking to you still. So the idea is that um so someone's come into your office, they have a lot of trauma and you're you have the the um you know power of the penu subscribe something not subscribe that's a subscription for you know Apple TV or something prescribe right you could say hey um they could say I'm hearing voices you go hey here's some how And here's a invest shot, whatever. Right. Here's respirator. Um I I feel like my mom has joked with me that I've been like a human pharmacy over the years. I've probably, you know, unfortunately taken many different things. and um been been through the system, you know, but if I could go back in time and I'm like in your office at the beginning of, you know, 21 21 22 year old Jared who's about to be 40 in November, right? Like, and I start telling you about my dad was abusive and yelled and all this instability as a kid and then now you know what you know now, right? Like that's the thing that's interesting now that I think is not in the mainstream. Uh, you know, people I think are still defaulting to what we've been, you know, laughing about a little bit, but it's not really funny because it's people's lives. Yeah. You know, profoundly, I'm sure it has. Yeah. And I watched um the documentary Medicating Normal about four years ago that was about the the med thing, too. And I know it's probably not the only documentary out there, but that was a good one. And it's like, yeah, and I think people can feel in my case, you're like, well, I don't want to have the experience of um being suicidal. Um, and then I think it when you hear the word trauma, you can be overwhelmed by like, well, how do I heal from that? And there's there's the influence of psychedelics as well, right? Where maybe someone all this is what what my book is about. Yeah. Yeah. Which I gotta read right here, guys. Right here. So you can't see it with my background anyway. Uh yeah, but I can show it here. Yeah. Yeah, show it off, man. Yeah. And have you written other books? I don't. Awesome. And uh so let let me tell you what my theory is and Yeah. Yeah. Get into it. Get into it. Is that backwards? No, you can see it's a little blurry, but that's okay. I'll put a link in my notes and uh you can get on Amazon and probably on your website. Yeah, I think it's coming up backwards. Um there you go. Goodbye anxiety, depression, addiction. So, it says goodbye anxiety, depression, addiction, and PTSD. There we go. The lifechanging science of dual brain psychology. And my name's at the bottom. There we go. Of course. Yeah, you wrote it. And um and um um so uh here's the gist of the theory. I can give it a sort of thumb from now. What I discovered was that as an early young psychiatrist, I'm now an old psychiatrist. Uh I saw that people were having two different personalities. When they came in, they were very anxious and depressed and uh h having a lot of symptoms and uh and then they got better and they were doing uh well mostly was with with psychotherapy. they might be on some medication. Um um and um and then something would happen and they'd have a regression and they'd go back and when they were doing well they were mature and healthy and it was like they were a different person and then when they regressed they were back to this sort of childlike person who was symptomatic and uh I started thinking that I wasn't seeing like the Freudian id and super ego and and and uh and and ego. Um I understood what they were uh but that's not what I was seeing clinically. I was seeing two different people. And then uh I started reading about uh the split brain studies in the 1960s. Uh these were uh surgery surgeries for epilepsy where they actually cut the brain in half. And and it turns out that each half of the brain can support an intelligent mind that's different. And one person wanted to smoke and his other hand connected to his other brain kept putting the cigarettes out. Two hands were fighting over which sandwich to eat. and and u there all these stories about um um or postcomottomy syndrome uh where they're they're clearly two different personalities and they have different intentions and and different feelings. I I went out to California and did the last study on these people and I I put different words up on a computer screen and I was able to psychologically ask how much do you feel uh with different words on the screen and each hemisphere had all the words and it turned out that in one person his uh right hemisphere had a a more positive uh opinion of himself his left's hemisphere had a low opinion of himself and and the the other patient uh had about equal opinions. Uh but he told me when we were setting up the equipment that he'd been bullied as a child and only the left brain can speak in these individuals after the surgery and uh so when I tested them I threw in some bully questions and the hand that was answering for his speaking left brain indicated he was not upset by the bullies. He told me that and his hand agreed with him. Okay. uh his the other hand a signing for his non-speaking right brain indicated that he was extremely upset by the police and his excuse was it happened so long ago why should I be upset about it but his his right brain the mind of his right brain was extremely upset by the bullies so so my then I I discovered that there's a German group that was purporting to show movies with a million dollar machine to one brain or the other and and and they got differently uh up different degrees of upsetness watching a movie of somebody getting shock treatment and uh uh and so I couldn't afford that but I I realized that all they were doing was showing the movie to the lateral visual field which is connected to the opposite brain neurologically and and the split brain studies took advantage of that and so I I asked a patient to go like this. I tried it at home and I didn't feel anything. Okay. And the patient was a Vietnam vet and he and he was doing well. He had PTSD. Uh and uh he went like that and he had a flashback. He said that plant behind looks like the jungle. I said, "Really?" I said, "Try the other side." And he smiled. He said, "No, it's a nice looking plant." and and uh so just by looking and on one side like this or like this uh can give a very different activation of a different personality in normal people and that's what my work is based on that trauma gets localized in one brain hemisphere and a brain hemisphere uh supports a mind. So we have two mommies. My first book was called of two minds. Gotcha. And uh so what what the treatment is uh so I have these special glasses, these sunglasses, and uh and they they not only look cool, but they simulate they do what the hands just did. If I show you here, you can see that there's a window on one side. Okay? and and my all of my patients wear these and they'll put them on this way and I have a conversation with with the little boy or little girl and and uh and talk to him about uh what are you feeling and and and uh the guy I saw today. He was severely bullied in in high school. Okay. and and to your hind and uh I mean to to an extreme degree and and so he's now in his late 50s and uh if he goes for a walk he's got to know where his car is. It's like this part of him uh expects the bullies to pop out of a bush and assault him even though he's in a suburban neighborhood that's quite uh you know calm and this is how many how many years later? So he's like a this is like when he was a kid and now this is like 20 years later. Well, it's more than that. It's right 35 years later. Yeah, it's Yeah, it's interesting because um what I if he were flips him this way, he has no fear. It's all gone. And if he if if a person has an alcohol craving and and they look out the the troubled side, uh I'll have an auction. I'll say, "Well, if I have a beer in my refrigerator, what will you pay me?" And I get him up to $500, right? And there's a convenience store down the street. And uh uh and then I have him flip the glasses and he won't pay me anything. I had a guy who was gambling uh and uh I said, "Boy, you know, he came to the right place. I happened to have a casino in the bank." And I said, "But there's a problem. There's a cover charge." So we had an auction. Oh, yeah. Yeah, I think I started reading this right before you were jumping on the Zoom. I started reading the that's the first chapter, second chapter. Yeah. Yeah. Uh it might be. Yeah. I don't So yeah, you're you're So yeah, I think I think I track with going with what's going on obviously uh people listening read the book, myself included, just to get get into it more. But yeah, it's like so so like instead of um uh you know, I was about to use the word normal like normal therapy, you would you know, obviously take some time to um get used to the therapist and you would start getting into kind of this like hey well in a talk way you would kind of in a storytelling way go back to like hey well my dad did this, my mom did this, I you And that that's a struggle for a lot of people because just depends on you know can take a while to get to like oh okay that made you sad that made you mad what did you do you know you're you're so what is the process of like cuz I think when people hear the word trauma and then you're like hey how do you heal from this I know there's like EMDR which I've never done I just know kind of conceptually what it is right what is your like um process of Yeah. How like what do you do in these sessions then with people? Is it like helping them to to heal from it because of this kind of cuz cuz I get what you're saying. It's like Yeah. I think the trauma lives in a part of our our brain that we've closed ourselves off to. Right. Right. So So what I do is I talk to the trouble part. Okay. The part that's the traumatized like the kid being bullied. You go back. Yeah. So, so put the glasses on and then we'll have a conversation. And do you want to try it? Do you have an envelope handy or would you rather not? Oh, wait. What' you say? You want me to try it? If you want. Yeah. Yeah, sure. All right. I I I did this once with uh um with a gal who was like doing this healing thing, and I was like, "All right, sure. It's my go back to my troubled um past as a as a little as a little kid that it's I mean I talk about you have like an envelope or something. What' you say? You have an envelope handy? An envelope? Um or not? Like I have like What do you have in your hand there? Is that a card? Uh I have I have some flash cards. Yeah. Okay, that's good. Flash cards are great. Okay. So, I want you to block one eye and the middle of the other eye. So, that's it. Perfect. Okay. Now, uh so I want you to uh think of something upsetting, maybe something with with your following and u and uh from 0 to 10 uh how much uh anxiety or distress do you feel? Oh man. Oh gosh. I mean probably like eight or nine. I mean there's somebody out the other eye. Okay. Look the eye that's completely the eye that's completely closed. Your left eye and look out the lateral side of your right eye. So like look to the this eye to the side like this. Yeah, that's right. Just like you just did. Okay, I'm doing that. No, you you got to move. That's You just looked out that eye. That was your job. But keep my left eye closed. Yeah, you can close it or recover it. And then but look to the side of my right eye. That's right. Okay. Okay. So, it's turn your head. Turn your head. Say, "Look at me." No, look at me here so I can see what you're doing. Okay. Uh, no. I Let me see your eye. Your right eye. Look at me. I think you're covering your whole right eye. Oh, like this. No, no, they go like, let me show you. Um, so you cover your left eye and then and half of your uh right. Should I use Should I use a my phone? Yeah. Okay. So, that's the left side. Okay. Oh, you Oh, so cover. So, like like this. Yeah. And move it over further. Yeah, if you look at it, it goes to both hemispheres. Okay. And we have fMRI as a document that we're stimulating that brain hemisphere. Okay. So, if you think of the same thing that you thought on the other side, uh, how much distress do you feel? Well, yeah, probably like nine or 10. I was going back to a specific memory of something. I mean, I can tell you what it is, but just I'm thinking of it. So, Is there any difference between the sides? Um, so you're saying that the eye that's covered up, keep it covered up, but then the eye right here where I'm halfway. Yeah. Supposed to look to the side or keep looking straight? I need to look straight. Yeah. Okay. I'm looking straight right now. But keep the other eye closed. Uh, yeah. We're covered. It doesn't act. Oh, okay. I have a kind of squinting glass. Open your eye. Uh, with Yeah. And and and if that's too intense, think of something uh just think of something ordinary like what you had for lunch today. Oh, right. You're looking out the whole eye and that won't work. There you go. Okay. Okay. Yeah. I mean, yeah. How How do you feel when you look out the side? You got to open your eyes. Look. So, the idea that is that you're there's less distress looking to the side. not looking to the side but the eye is divided with the retina. The light comes in through the lens and it strikes the retina on the medial side and that cross neurologically connected to the opposite brain. So if you here's my left eye, okay? And and and if I look at something here, it goes hits this part and goes to my right brain. And and if if if I'm over here uh and I look over here, it it hits this part and goes to my left brain. Okay. So yeah, you kind of walk people through this process and they discover that um like maybe they just haven't been kind of because of this exercise. They haven't felt something that existed a long time ago and then they start to well no that again something that what what happens all usually is that the person's feeling the negative side all the time and that they the first time feel good. Okay. Right. Right. So they like whoa what's this? My anxiety went away. Yeah. They experienced the the as if it wasn't there. Well, yeah. Yeah. That one one side is healthy and and the and the other side is is affected by the trauma and it's not well. So would you Yeah. Yeah, that makes sense. I mean, so the question is is how do you treat the trauma? Well, yeah. Because living without it, that's the experience that Well, maybe, you know, you don't like know what it's like until you experience like, oh, this is what it's like to to feel better. And maybe would you call that healing? He healed or is that more just like an awareness of? No, you can heal people. Uh, right. But it's not a simple thing. Uh, there there are a lot of uh things that happen. In other words, if a person really improves, uh, their troubled side may get upset and feel, "Hey, you want me to go out on disability?" You know, the hell with you, you know, and they kicked up a storm and and and and but when you get well, you see how sick you were and it's really painful and it's a hard process to get through. You have to be able to bear that pain and and the treatment for trauma is to be able to sit with it to the point where you don't have to run from it and and uh to see that you can stand it and and to learn that you're not in Vietnam anymore. uh or or you're you're not uh in other words, it's it's teaching that little boy inside or little girl uh as the case may be uh that uh that the trauma is actually over and um and and the other way that I have for stimulating the healthy side uh is with a light that I put on the forehead. So it's it's um uh it's an LED and it's it goes through the skull. The light actually goes through the skull into the brain and stimulates the brain. It's called photo biofoto modulation trans uh uh bofoto modulation and I'm the only person who does it on one side. If you do it on both sides, you defeat yourself because you're simulating both sides. uh and one side's troubled. I have a new device that stimulates the positive and inhibits the negative side and it's more effective. But that light treatment has no known side effects that we've seen. The only side effect is that sometimes people will um get upset uh because they feel better like I just said and and their negative side and they rebel and then you have to talk to them and they'll be okay. But uh but but they don't they don't get sick from it. Yeah. Getting upset over feeling better. I can Yeah, I think that that's Yeah, that's more of a reaction to just proving that you've been feeling bad for a long time. So, that's a a new thing to feel good. So, yeah, maybe your your actions and also feeling good. It's like going to a foreign country and you don't you don't know the language, you don't know the customs. Uh that you you know this world and it's like a different world where you're not well and and people treat you badly and and and uh uh and your expectations are negative and and in this other world it's like you're a different person and it's like who is this person and and and yeah and it's disconcerting. Yeah. Well, I you my well, yeah, I think my exper Yeah. Not just my experience, but I think if you just been stuck for a long time or dealing with symptoms or how whatever language you want to use, uh it feels too good to be true when you do something that works like breath work or uh doing, you know, you know, I've done a couple ice baths. I don't know if you ever done an ice bath. the way you feel after is like really good. Going through it absolutely sucks. You know, you want to get out after like two seconds, but like there, you know, whatever. Um, you know, I ran a marathon a bunch of years ago and I felt really good for a while and then, you know, I ended up um kind of having an episode a couple months later. So, not the best idea, but like yeah, I think it's we feel like it's too good to be true. And you're not saying it's so simple that like anybody can Yeah, I I get it. I think it's just we're so used to feeling bad. So we when we feel good it's like how long is this going to last? And there's there's another piece to trauma that's very important and and Freud talked about this and that there's a compulsion to repeat the trauma and and and there's an example that I give to patients uh to explain this because it's a weird concept. I'm here I'm here. Sorry, I just had to turn my fan on. Okay, keep going. Uh uh I said to my patient um u why would I uh call up or go go to Medford, Massachusetts, where Bulier used to hang out and find him and say, "Whyy, you son of a [ __ ] Kill me already. Why would I do that?" Then patient says, "I don't know. You must be crazy." Okay. And I said, "Well, I'm going to tell you a story and it's going to make sense why I would do that." And so, here's my story. Uh I'm sitting talking to talking to this very nice person in the podcast and we're having a nice conversation and I get a call my uh phone and guy says this this is way shipper uh give me a million dollars by 5:00 bring it to the tea station the you know the public transportation stop at the end of my street uh or you dead meat and I don't kind of money what are you talking about? Well, then they dead at me and they hang up and and uh and I'm sick, right? I just say, "We have to stop the podcast. I don't feel good." I go home and a funny thing happens. I don't sleep that night. And and and I don't next morning I don't hear from Whitey Bulger. And a week goes by, I don't hear from him. I feeling better. No, I'm sick. I'm I haven't slept. from wreck and and Wendy Bolner had a reputation of being a ferocious gangster who would jump down from a tree and hit you with a baseball bat and and uh he was terrifying to people and uh so after a month I'm sick. I can't stand it. So I go looking for him. Why? He killed me already. I can't stand this. So, let's let's get it over with. Mhm. And now it makes sense. I mean, it might not be a mature solution or the wisest solution to the problem. Might have been better to, you know, get on a plane to Bolivia or something, you know, but but u um uh but that that's my my solution. It's a solution of people with trauma that that they have to repeat the trauma with an alcoholic father. Who does she marry? She marries a a an alcoholic who who's right falling all over. And he gets better because she nurses him and she but she loses interest in him because he's not a stumbling alcoholic. And and and uh um uh that she's repeating her trauma. That's her drive. very her her mission in life is to fix her father and make everything well. And and and that that drive to attend to the traumas is is what drives these bad behaviors. Uh that that I I think that people get addicted to coke in part because it feels good. You get it up, but you're also addicted to coming down and why the hell I do that? put all the money up my nose and and and and feel terrible and frail and then shame and I'm a drug addict and uh and beat myself. Well, that's what your mother said. you know, oh, you'll never mount anything and you're a bum like your uncle's a drug addict and you're you're going to be a drug addict and and and so all that stuff is like going to see Winnie Vulture and you want to get it over with. So you bring on the bad stuff and uh so so trauma is tricky and and and people on their own they don't know how to deal with it. most psychiatrists with people the most. Yeah. Well, I think that Yeah, for sure. And I think it comes back to um kind of the beginning of of talking my you know the experience of or I was saying like hey you have the um uh ability to just you know sit down with someone and listen you know do an assessment h you know however you do that and just be like oh sounds like depression sounds like bipolar one sounds like bipolar Yeah. Right. Exactly. After a session, we we a patient feels much better by the time they leave. Yeah. Well, no, I'm saying and I I I guess it's like Yeah. A lot of psychiatrists probably don't do what you're doing and they do the thing where they just go, "Sounds like Exactly. Sounds like this." And then now you're putting someone on a path and and you know also in those situations the patient needs to be assertive and have autonomy as well because I think there is this like submit to whatever the doctor says because you're not a doctor and so so I definitely relate to that kind of fear dynamic. Uh, and so but it's like is that just because psychiatrists are um and this was Dr. Smith's point I just had him on about how um his thing was like that primary care doctors are seeing a lot of people because people can't even get psychiatrist appointments. So, they're not trained, but then they're also like, "Hey, here's uh you know, here's Lexapro, here's this." And um like do you think it's just that there's so much they're not that psychiatrists aren't trained in trauma so they just jump to like they I have so many patients, here's meds, and they just kind of hope for the best. Uh there a lot of therapists who uh call themselves trauma therapists. Um, okay. I don't refer to them. You don't refer to someone who would say they're a trauma therapist. That's what you're saying. I I But I I I have a, you know, a small list of people I would refer to. Right. Right. Well, because Yeah. So, is the trauma training because the thing that I'm learning with this new job and that I've I've known from working with foster kids a little bit too is that traumainformed care, that's the thing that people, you know, put out into a balloon into the atmosphere. There are there are good therapists and I'm but uh you know where you find them and and and so forth is is hard to tell. Right. Right. And you kind of don't know until you would go maybe like, hey, well, even then it's hard to know because as you say, you can you can have a a warm chat with somebody for for 30 years and and and not really go go anywhere. uh uh and uh right right I think good therapy is very effective but but to find it is very hard and and it's hard to be a consumer because it's it's very hard to to know where you are and and what what you need and and where you can find it and and whether what you're getting is what you need and I have I have people who drop out of my work you know they don't like what I'm doing and fine you I I have to I can only work with someone uh who likes what I'm doing and and Yeah. Yeah. You have to Yeah. You have to support that. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Um Yeah. You Yeah. I didn't mean to interrupt, but I just Yeah. You have to be open to um trying new things. probably both, you know, someone in your position and someone that's like if you you do need to want to get better. So, you need to have a certain level of like openness and humility to like, hey, this guy's going to make me close one of my eyes. I mean, I just tried to do your exercise and obviously we we, you know, we can do it a different time when we're not recording. And for my patients, it's it's very effective. And about 55% of patients in in the series that I published, right, had uh very intense responses and about 30% had positive responses that were that were therapeutically useful and about 15% had no response. And uh so most of my patients you you're able to use this technique and uh and I think again plugging my book uh but I mean it is that I think the book can help a lot of people if they read it uh and and it it it um it's a substant book. I think it's it I tried to write it as an easy read but with a lot of substance and and u and I think it it actually can help people. Okay. It's not a self book per se. There's a chapter for self-help but I think it actually uh informs people about how the mind really works. Yeah, for sure. Yeah. I appreciate your perspective and your honesty and I know we just, you know, feel like you're easy to talk to and I've appreciated being able to be real about, you know, my own experiences as well. I've had this podcast for a long time and it's cool to get to talk to someone who's um you know not just a you know lay person because that's mostly who I've you know lay people with things that they're good at and specialize in but I have you know it'd be cool to talk to more people like you who are like you know in this field and and how long have you been been um a doctor? When did you start? uh grad going to medical school in 1971, which was uh 64 years ago. Okay. All right. So, you're you're just you're just 81 years old. Oh, wow. All right. You're looking good, man. You're gonna just you're just going to go another 20 years. So, you're 101. 101. Yeah. Well, you guys got some harsh winners out there in Boston. So hopefully it's just I said you guys get some harsh winters out there in Massachusetts. So hopefully I or I said Boston, but yeah, you get some harsh East Coast winter. So hopefully it's like starting to be like sunny outside where you're at. It is. Yeah. But no, I really appreciate you coming on. I'll put the link to your book in my notes and um I'll I'll get the other information from you. I know you probably have a web you have a website. What's the best way for people to talk to you? Dualbrain psychology. Okay. Dualbrain psychology. And I didn't say dualbrain psychiatry because I I I like psychology the word psychology better. So dualbrain psychology.com. Okay. And then do you use uh social media or you have someone do that for you? You use somebody do it. Okay. One of the the you know main sites and I have podcasts that are posted Yeah, I'll get I'll get all that information from um whoever emailed me about you for getting Mark. Yeah, Mark. Yeah, but I appreciate um this coming on and like I said, I'll read I got to get into your book more and um let me know what you think. Yeah, absolutely. Yeah, I there's there's uh uh I had Dr. Robert Smith on and I'm like, shoot, I need to read that book, too. I read I looked at a little bit of it. So, it's like I got a lot of reading to do. But yeah, I know that's cool that you I got The Body Keeps the Score right here on next to my um I know there's other books on trauma. I think I have That's cool that you know um Bessel. Is that how you say his name? That's his name. That's cool. Is he still in the area where you live? He is. Awesome. That's cool. Well, um Dr. uh how do you say your last name? Shifer. Shiffer shfu. Okay, Shiffer, I appreciate your time and I I'll I'll email with with you and with your team about, you know, when this is going to get published. Let you go and have a great night and thank you. Thanks for being on the podcast. I appreciate it. Thanks so much. All right. [Music] Goodbye. Heat. [Music] Heat. [Music] Heat. [Music] Heat. Heat. Heat. N. [Music]